Introduction to Game Theory MATH60141/MATH70141
Lectured by Dr Sam Brzezicki∗
Autumn Term 2025
Chapter 1: Prelude
1.1 About this Module
Welcome to Introduction to Game Theory! This course will provide you with a broad understanding of the
basics of game theory and investigates several of the different types of games that we can analyse using the
theory. We will endeavour to build up our knowledge in as ‘hands on’ a way as possible with an ‘active’
learning style, often by playing games in the classroom to understand the ideas and concepts. There will
also be recommendations of games to play as homework as well as collaboration on a group assessed task
(more on that later). Throughout the module applications of the theory will be presented; we’ll see applications in the economic behaviour of market competitors, competition between biological species, how to make
informed military decisions, politics and how to run for prime minister, traffic and congestion, bargaining
and coming to collaborative agreements, whether you should pay your taxes, applications in sport and also
where to meet for a date (and many more applications)!
The course has been split into seven chapters, starting with chapter 1, the prelude, where we are now,
which will be a short excursion exploring a few games and talking about what constitutes mathematical
game theory. Chapter 2 then goes on to look at the concepts of dominance, best response and equilibria.
In chapter 3 we introduce the notion of a mixed strategy and prove Nash’s theorem on the existence of an
equilibrium in finite games. Chapter 4 concerns zero sum games, or strictly competitive games, where we
will understand the concept of max-min and min-max strategies and see Von Neumann’s Minimax theorem.
Chapter 5 deals with an introduction to cooperation in games, and how players may improve their success
by cooperating on an agreed joint strategy. We will see the Nash bargaining solution arise from a set of
axioms. In chapter 6 we will focus on congestion games, or traffic games, a type of potential game. In this
context we will see how equilibria emerge and investigate whether these equilibria are always socially good
by using a ratio known as the price of anarchy. ‘Finally’ (for year 3 students) we arrive at chapter 7 on
combinatorial games. In this chapter we will focus on the game of Nim and see how it plays a central role
in the theory of these games. Then if you’re a year 3 student that’s the end of the assessed course content,
but if you’re in year 4 or are an MSc student, then there is an extra, self-study (we won’t cover this chapter
together in class), chapter 8 which takes a deeper look into game trees and in particular their use to model
games of imperfect information.
∗
sb3710@imperial.ac.uk
1
1.1.1 Accessability
This module requires few prerequisites and has been designed with one aim of trying to ‘open the door’ for
more cross-departmental study into the mathematics department (which is typically difficult). As such, any
third/fourth year Mathematics, Physics or Computer Science student will be well equipped for studying the
module. For students slightly further reaching, like third/fourth year Engineers, Chemists and Biologists,
it is likely that you will be able to take the module with your current mathematics knowledge but it is
recommended that you speak with the lecturer about suitability so you (and me) are put at ease: there may
be one or two gaps in your knowledge for which a small amount of supplementary reading can be used to
bridge them.
1.1.2 Prerequisites
Though we have said the module is accessible, for those wanting a more detailed breakdown the following
topics should be considered prerequisite knowledge:
• Basic Probability and Statistics;
• One-dimensional Calculus;
• Mathematical notation;
• Vectors and Matrices;
• Logic and Proof techniques; we will utilise several different methods of proof and logical arguments,
this is perhaps the only area which could be lacking for students beyond Maths, Physics and Computer
Science. As mentioned - if you are unsure on your current level of knowledge, please get in touch with
the lecturer!
1.1.3 Study Materials and Reading Lists
There are seven problem sets to accompany these lecture notes; one for each chapter, which may build on
understanding from previous chapters as we develop our knowledge further. The problems will generally
start simple and progress in difficulty throughout each sheet. The majority of the problems should enrich
your understanding of the concepts and prepare you well for examination (there will be nothing included
that would constitute a waste of your time). Occasionally, problems with one of two symbols by the question
number may appear. Firstly star problems, which are considered (very) difficult. The solution of these may
include references to research papers for instance. Nevertheless they are included for interest and often take
the theory in the notes a little further. Secondly diamond problems, which are not necessarily of any specific
difficulty, but are open problems that have deliberately been left unsolved (no solutions will be provided for
these). These are included to provide ideas for possible group coursework topics (see soon). Usually these
are ideas and problems the lecturer thinks are interesting, but hasn’t had a chance to investigate yet!
The course has been designed so that it is entirely self-contained; meaning that these lecture notes, along
with the seven problem sets contain everything that you will need to prepare for the examination, so if you
don’t learn efficiently from using books and other resources don’t worry, everything you need is included.
Nevertheless, many students like to learn from the use of textbooks on the topic so a short reading list is
2
included below. There are many books on game theory and really any textbook introducing the topic will
contain similar information, so feel free to browse the library if you’re looking for a different choice. Some
useful texts include:
• Game Theory Basics (Bernhard von Stengel): For those looking for a companion book for the course
this should be your number one choice. We will very closely follow parts of this book throughout
several chapters of this course. In fact this book really re-shaped some parts of this module, so if you
prefer to learn from textbooks then the corresponding chapters from this book are my recommended
reading;
• Introduction to Game Theory (Peter Morris);
• The Theory of Games (Jianhua Wang);
• Introducing Game Theory and its Applications (Mendelson, Chapman and Hall);
• Game Theory: A Nontechnical Introduction to the Analysis of Strategy (Roger McCain);
• Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays (Berlekamp, Conway and Guy).
Below are some other resources that I recommend (of course I have developed these notes because I want
you to use them, but hearing different explanations of the same concept can help you to master it):
• There is an excellent series of lectures on Game Theory by Ben Polak from Yale university on Youtube
(YaleCourses). The lecture series is delivered primarily to Economics majors (eww), meaning the level
of mathematics is generally lower than what we will employ, but nevertheless Ben does a fantastic job
of explaining the concepts of the theory - for those that are interested in more detail on the social,
political and economic aspects of the theory, then these lectures are highly recommended. Many of the
classroom games we will play have also been taken from Ben’s game theory course.
• The lecture notes on Algorithmic Game Theory by Tim Roughgarden (these are also written into a
book called ‘Twenty Lectures on Algorithmic Game Theory’). For our course they prove an excellent
resource for Congestion Games.
• Finally, and most importantly, the lecture notes and module on the Dynamics and Learning of Iterated
Games (which you should certainly consider taking if you are interested in this module) taught by Professor Sebastian van Strien here in the Mathematics department at Imperial is an excellent companion
to this module. This module has been designed so that there is as minimal overlap as possible with this
companion. Where we have some gaps on the theory of repeated games and dynamics within games,
such as evolutionary game theory, that module delves deep into these concepts.
If you find a textbook or any resource you believe to be excellent, please let me know!
1.1.4 Assessment
The module will have an assessed group coursework task, worth 10%. This will take place during the Autumn term, probably released mid term and due towards the end of term - more details closer to the time!
There will be a 1hour 30 minutes long exam with three questions worth a total of 90% in the May-June
exam season. For Master’s students the weightings remain the same but this exam will be 2 hours long and
contain an extra question aimed at Master’s level and most likely based on the chapter 8 content.
3
1.1.5 Final Administrative Things
There will be a weekly ‘office hour’ (I’ll be in my office and free for one hour to answer any questions you
might have about anything for this module) that you are welcome to come and drop by during if you have
any questions that you want to ask me. My office is room 657 in Huxley. During the first lecture we will do
a vote as to when the office hour will take place.
The course has 30 hours of scheduled lectures; usually 3 hours per week for 10 weeks. We will use approximately 25 of these as lectures, where we will move through these lecture notes and cover new content.
The remaining 5 hours we will dedicate to being ‘problem classes’; spread approximately one every 2 weeks,
where we will spend the time going through some of the problems from the problem sheets. We may also
play some additional classroom games during these sessions that didn’t quite fit into the main lecture notes,
so don’t miss out!
1.2 The Everybody Bids Game
Let’s play a game. We’ll involve everybody in the class (I’ll play too!). Everyone in the class is going to be
given a piece of paper, and on that paper you need to write down your name and a whole number between
0 and 100 inclusive. Don’t let anyone see your number and don’t discuss your decision with anyone! Once
everyone has decided on their number, the papers will all be collected and the average (the mean) of the
numbers we all chose will be calculated (any bids that are not whole numbers within the range given will be
discarded and not count towards the average). Whoever has bid closest to one half of the class average will
be declared the winner of the game! If there are multiple people with the same closest bid then they are all
declared winners of the game.
Activity: Play the game!
1.2.1 Discussion
There are a few useful concepts to discuss here. We will generalise and formalise some of these ideas later
in the course, but for now let’s identify them and appreciate how they might influence dictating the play of
the game.
Let’s think about choosing a number in the range from 51 to 100. We can notice that this is not going to
be a good choice (it’s a bad choice actually, in fact a strictly dominated strategy - we will define what
exactly a strategy is and what we mean by these terms soon), why? Well let’s think, even if everyone in
the class bid 100, then one half of the average would be 1/2 × 100 = 50, so 50 is definitely going to be closer
to one half of the class average than 51, or 52, or 53, or anything up to and including 100, regardless of
what everyone else is doing. So we can conclude that choosing any number from 51 to 100 is certainly not
optimal, since choosing 50 would give us a bid strictly closer to one half of the average, a better choice.
Now that we know this, what can we say about the game and the players. Well it’s not just us that this
knowledge applies to, we are not playing against beings that can’t think for themselves, it applies to every
player in the game. So no rational player (or no intelligent player that wants to try and win) will have
chosen a number between 51 and 100. This means that we can, in essence, re-state the game. It’s the same
4
game as before, except now we know that the players are going to choose numbers between 0 and 50 (we
can ‘delete’ or ‘remove’ the numbers 51 to 100 from the game as no rational player will choose them). What
does this mean about a play of the game?
Well, let’s take our logic from earlier one step further, we can conclude that all the numbers from 26 to 50
are now bad choices, since even if everyone bidded 50, one half of the average would then be 25. So now no
rational player will choose any number from 26 to 50. Can you see what is going to happen?
Indeed if we continue the above argument, after each iteration removing all the ‘bad’ choices, we will eventually reach the situation where everyone is choosing the number 0. There is then no better any player can
do, since the average is now at 0 (if everyone is bidding 0), so bidding any other number will cause the player
to be further away from one half of the average than if they were to bid 0. Each player is now responding
best to what all the other players are doing. This situation is an important concept in game theory, known
as an equilibrium, or a Nash equilibrium (named after John Nash, one of the most famous mathematicians
to progress the theory). We will talk about these equilibria extensively throughout the course - in fact, so
powerful is the concept of an equilibrium in a game, that one can even think of classical game theory as
being the search for equilibria in games.
1.3 The Sweets Dilemma
Let’s play another game. This game is played between two players and each player has the choice to play
strategy 1 or strategy 2. To involve everyone in the class we are going to do the following: on your sheet of
paper write your name and whether you want to play strategy 1 or strategy 2, we will then collect in all the
papers and randomly assign you against each other in pairs to see what the outcomes are. If you want to
discuss your ideas with those around you before you make your choice feel free to do so! Before that I need
to tell you what the outcomes of the game are under each possibility.
Each player has two options available to them, strategy 1 or strategy 2. If both players choose strategy 1,
then they each receive nothing. If both players choose strategy 2, then they each receive 1 sweet, but if
one player chooses strategy 1 and the other player chooses strategy 2 then the player who chose strategy 1
receives their sweet and their opponent’s sweet (a total of 2 sweets!) and the player who chose strategy 2
receives nothing.
Activity: Play the game!
1.3.1 Discussion
Let’s discuss the game a little bit as there are a few useful things to note here. First, to try and help visualise
the game, let’s put the information into a table, shown in figure 1. Let’s call our first player A and our
second player B and denote the strategies as s1 and s2 (strategy 1 and strategy 2).
5
Figure 1: The Sweets Dilemma
We will see another example with more detail in section 1.7, but this is a common way to display certain
two-player games. The rows correspond to each strategy of player A and the columns to each strategy of
player B. In each cell a pair of entries are given: the first the amount of sweets player A receives if that pair
of strategies is chosen, the second entry the amount of sweets player B receives. These values are widely
referred to as the payoffs to the players in the game.
Now that the information is more clearly summarised we might notice something interesting - that playing
strategy 2 feels ‘a bit weaker’ in some way. Indeed, notice that if our opponent plays strategy 2, then we
will get more sweets (we’ll get 2) by playing strategy 1 than if we played strategy 2 (where we’d get only
1 sweet), and if they play strategy 1, then we will get nothing regardless of what we choose. So it feels
like strategy 1 ‘does better’ for us than strategy 2 (indeed, as we will define more rigorously later, strategy
1 weakly dominates strategy 2). By this logic it feels like, since strategy 1 performs either the same or
better than strategy 2, we should play strategy 1. But if both players follow this line of thought then they
end up with no sweets at all! However, this is an (and in due course you will see how to show this is the
only) equilibrium of this game played in this manner.
There is more to say here however. It is likely upon playing the game in class that actually some players
did choose strategy 2, and moreover some of those players were paired up together and received a sweet
each. Why? Strategy 1 seemed at least as good as 2 if not better, so why would some players still choose
strategy 2? Analysing the game in the way we have in figure 1 is making a judgement on our players - that
what they care about is getting as many sweets as possible for themselves, hence their payoffs are exactly
the number of sweets received. For some of you this might be a really bad assumption on which to model
your payoffs! Some of you might not like sweets at all, so might see even 2 sweets as worthless. Some players
may value the thought of sharing and negatively value the thought of backstabbing their classmates, making
6
them uneasy about the choice of strategy 1, resulting in a tendency to go for strategy 2. All of these ideas
would end up changing the payoffs for a player, so it is very important to have a clear concept of what each
player’s payoff is in a game to be able to analyse it effectively!
Remark: In this course we will not look at the concept of a player’s utility, but those interested in how
payoffs can take account for these personal ‘values’ of a player might be interested in reading more about
utility theory.
A final point to mention here is that of communication. In the game communication was allowed beforehand
with those nearby; people you would unlikely be assigned against. Even if you could communicate with the
person you were going to be playing against, would it help? Notice that even if a player says they will play
strategy 2, they are still incentivised (if they care about maximising their own amount of sweets) to lie about
this and switch to strategy 1 as it will give them the chance of getting more sweets than strategy 2 could.
So under the premise that this game is being played non-cooperatively, communication doesn’t help here
and players are incentivised to try and convince each other to play strategy 2 so that they can profit from
playing strategy 1. Ultimately this will result in both players playing strategy 1 most of the time!
However, if we could change the rules slightly, and allow the players to play the game cooperatively with
an enforced or binding agreement on their strategy choices, i.e they had to agree on a pair of strategies
and then were obliged to see that agreement through, then they could collectively do better, for example,
by agreeing on playing strategy 2 and each receiving 1 sweet. This is much better than both players trying
to backstab one another and ending up with nothing. We will see more of this idea later in chapter 5 when
we discuss co-operative game theory.
1.4 Principles, Elements and Classification of Games
As we have highlighted through our discussions of the two games we’ve played so far, in the real world
people play games with a variety of principles behind their actions and at times without thought or rationality.
Although this is a very interesting philosophical and ethical problem to discuss, to build up an understanding
of the core mathematical principles of games, we will make some assumptions based on how we expect our
players to act which will pertain throughout the analysis we do in the course!
1.4.1 Principles of Game Theory
Some principles of mathematical game theory that we will assume throughout the course are:
• Values: In mathematical game theory we always analyse games as if every one of the players is trying
to win or optimise their own score/winnings. That is, we assume the players are rational and greedy.
The players don’t put any value on the ‘fun’ of playing the game or on any exterior societal implications
or morals. The players don’t act in irrational ways for any reason. In any games we model we will
assume that a player’s payoff will already factor in their values. For example, in the case where a player
would gain one sweet but their opponent nothing, a player who cares about others receiving sweets
too will have a lower payoff than a player who cares only about getting as many sweets as possible for
themselves. This moral value is then factored into the payoffs for the game.
7
• Rules: Games in this course and those which can be studied by game theory have strict rules. In the
real world, sometimes thinking ‘outside the box’ to discover a ‘new move’ or option in a situation is
a great skill, but in this course the games will always have specified moves which are available to the
players - the skill comes in determining which are the best moves!
• No Cheating: Linked to the last point, in the real world cheating can happen: you can swap a card
with one kept up your sleeve, you can change the state of a game while your opponent is distracted,
etc. To study games analytically we will assume no cheating takes place.
1.4.2 Elements of a Game
Some games we encounter will involve different elements, possibly there are random moves incorporated or
the physical location of the game matters. There are three core elements within all games we will study that
dictate our analysis. These are:
• Players: the number of players in the game needs to be given.
• Moves: the list of all possible moves at each point in the game for all players in the game and the
order in which these moves will take place (many games are asymmetric and different players will have
different moves available to them).
• Payoffs: The list of all payoffs (outcomes at the end of the game) for all players needs to be given.
This information will usually be given at the start of a game (in everything we will look at this will be the
case), though there are some interesting examples of games where this is not the case.
1.4.3 Classification of Games
There are many ways in which we can classify games, often related to the manner in which they are played.
Some of the main ways are shown here:
• Number of players: games can be played with different numbers of players, even single player where
the player is playing against ‘nature’, ‘the casino‘ or some set ‘algorithm’ - things that don’t have
conscious choice but follow an algorithm or have chance elements.
• Whether moves are simultaneous or sequential.
• Complete or incomplete information: a game is said to have complete information if all players know
the structure of the game: the amount, and order in which the players move, all possible moves in each
position and the payoffs for all possible outcomes for all players (Chess and Tic-Tac-Toe for example).
If any of these are not known the game has incomplete information (Bridge and many other card games
for example).
• Zero-sum (or constant-sum) games: these games have the property that the sum of all the payoffs to
all the players for each possible outcome of the game equals zero (or a constant).
• Communication: are the players allowed to communicate before/during the game or not at all?
• Cooperative or Non-cooperative: some games may be played cooperatively where the players try to
work together to maximise their payoffs. Other games are non-cooperative where the players are
playing against each other.
8
1.5 Strategies
Now is a good time to introduce an important definition, what we mean by the strategy of a player in a
game. This is different from the concept of a move in a game and also different to an outcome of a game,
which we will define fairly loosely here (as their meaning can become more specific depending on the type
of game being played).
Definition 1.1. A move refers to the action a player must make on their turn to progress from one game
position to the next position.
Definition 1.2. An outcome of a game refers to the final result (which may be win/lose/draw or a
combination of payoffs for all players) of a game once the game has been played.
Definition 1.3. A strategy for a player involves a complete description of all the moves that will be
made in any game position, including responses to any random moves (tossing coins, shuffling cards), and
the opponents’ moves. In other words, a strategy is a program which can be followed to play the game
mechanically.
There is one last definition we make now of a pure strategy. These will be the type of strategies considered
throughout this and the next chapter. Later, in chapter 3, we will generalise these pure strategies to include
mixed strategies (which we will define formally later but give an example now to clarify the difference
between these and pure strategies).
Definition 1.4. A pure strategy is a strategy that doesn’t involve any self-imposed random chances of
playing any moves.
This definition is based on negation, so here’s a quick example to try to clarify it slightly: a fair coin is tossed
and you have to guess whether it will land as heads or tails. Your pure strategies are to choose either heads
or tails with absolute intent. A mixed strategy would constitute actively deciding upon a probability that
you will choose heads. For example choosing heads with probability 1/2 (and hence tails with probability
1/2) would constitute a mixed strategy - for now don’t worry about these!
Let’s look at some examples to understand strategies better:
1.5.1 Examples
1). Two companies, A and B, each produce and sell a product. Each wants to increase their market share.
Company A intends to do some of either:
– Spend 10% of profits on advertising,
– Reduce the price of the product, or
– Give a free gift on purchase of the product.
Company B intends to do one of either:
– Spend 5% of profits on advertising, or
– Reduce the price of the product.
9
The companies act simultaneously in this game. How many pure strategies does each company
have?
Answer). Company A has 23 − 1 = 7 pure strategies. Company B has 2 pure strategies.
Exercise: If company B acts after company A (with full knowledge of company A’s choices), then how many
pure strategies does company B have?
2). A game consists of a fair coin being tossed showing either H (heads) or T (tails). Player A must then
make a move from a choice of n possible moves {m1, m2, · · · mn}. How many pure strategies does
player A have in this game?
Answer). A pure strategy in this game needs to tell player A what to do in either outcome of the coin toss, so
it is a map:
{H, T} 7−→ {m1, m2, · · · mn}.
For example, one possible pure strategy is: If the coin shows H, play m1, if the coin shows T, play m2.
So, in total, player A has n
2 different possible pure strategies for the game, one corresponding to each
mapping.
Notice this is very different to the set of possible moves for player A, where there are n, and also
different to the set of possible outcomes, where there are 2n (each possible coin outcome and move
pairing).
In the two examples above, the players all had a finite number of pure strategies to choose from, but this
does not have to be the case - a player may have an infinite number of pure strategies, for example; a player
must choose a real number from the interval [0, 1]. This motivates the following definition that we will use
to describe games.
Definition 1.5. We call a game finite if all players in the game have a finite number of pure strategies. If
at least one player has an infinite number of pure strategies then the game is an infinite game.
1.6 Goofspiel (The Game of Pure Strategies)
Let’s look at another game; Goofspiel, or sometimes called the game of pure strategies. This is a
two-player game (let’s call the players A and B). At the start of the game a positive integer n is decided,
which is traditionally 13 (as the game is commonly played with a deck of cards and there are 13 cards of
each suit). Each player is then given n cards numbered from 1 through to n (so in a deck of cards each
player takes all the cards of one suit and then the ace is considered to take value 1 and the Jack, Queen
and King are considered to take values 11, 12 and 13). Let’s say player A has red cards and player B
has blue cards, just to help distinguish them. Then another set of n cards (again numbered 1 through n),
which are coloured black, are shuffled and dealt face up into the centre, one at a time. After each black
card is dealt, players A and B simultaneously bid for the card by playing one of their coloured cards into
the centre. The player who places the larger bid (the higher valued card) scores a number of points equal
to the value that was on the black card dealt into the centre. If the two bids are equal (for instance both
10
players play their 1 card), then the number of points awarded to each player is equal to half the value of
the black card (or, in some variants, both players score zero points here). This comprises one round of
the game, after which all three cards involved are removed from the game. The game then continues with
the next black card being dealt into the centre and the players bidding on its points value using their remaining coloured cards. Once all cards have been used (after n rounds) the game concludes and the player
with the higher points total is declared the winner. If the players have an equal score then the game is drawn.
Activity: Play a game of 5 card (n = 5) Goofspiel. Discuss what seem to be ‘good’ strategies in this game.
Now we have seen the game of Goofspiel in action, let’s use it as another example of calculating the number
of pure strategies available to us. First let’s consider 2-card Goofspiel and ask the following question... how
many pure strategies does each player have in this game?
Well, a strategy for a player tells the player how to respond to the first dealt card. After that the rest of the
game is fully determined (as each player and the face-down deck have only 1 card left in them each). So, a
pure strategy is a map:
{dealt card} 7−→ {players first bid},
i.e. {1, 2} 7−→ {1, 2}.
Thus there are 22 = 4 different maps and hence there are 4 different pure strategies.
Remark: You will investigate more on the game of Goofspiel in problem sheet 1.
1.7 Displaying Games
Throughout this module we will encounter a wide variety of different games. Often there is a most convenient
way to display them. There are two common ways to display games and we will see both throughout the
course: normal (or strategic) form, or in extensive (or tree) form.
In normal form two-player games are represented in a table or matrix (for three or more players extra
dimensions would be needed). A schematic is shown in figure 2 and we will look at an example game soon
to explain the notation.
11
Figure 2: Schematic of a game in normal form.
In extensive form games are described using a tree, as shown in the schematic in figure 3.
Figure 3: Schematic of a game in extensive form.
In chapter 8 we’ll study game trees like this in more detail and give a formal definition of a strategy in this
context. The payoffs to each player are usually given at the bottom of each branch through the tree.
The two different approaches are equivalent, though it is often more convenient to use one approach over
12
the other based on the game being studied. Let’s look at an example to better see how a game might be
displayed in these ways.
1.7.1 Example Game
Suppose players A and B are playing a game. Player A has two possible pure strategies (a1 and a2) and so
does player B (b1 and b2).
• If player A chooses a1 and player B chooses b1, player A receives a score of 1 and player B gets 2;
• If player A chooses a1 and player B chooses b2, player A receives a score of 2 and player B gets nothing;
• If player A chooses a2 and player B chooses b1, player A receives a score of 5 and player B gets 1;
• Finally, if player A chooses a2 and player B chooses b2 then player A receives a score of 0 and player
B gets 3.
In normal form we would display this game as shown in figure 4.
Figure 4: The example game displayed in normal form.
Player A is placed on the left and their pure strategies are represented by the different rows. Player B is
placed at the top and their pure strategies are represented by the different columns. Inside the grid, each
cell contains a pair of payoffs corresponding to the two strategies played; the first payoff corresponding to
player A and the second to player B. If, for example, player A chooses a2 and player B chooses b2 the grid
shows 0, 3 representing that player A receives 0 and player B receives 3. This grid of payoffs is often referred
to as the payoff matrix for the game.
In extensive form the game could be displayed as shown in figure 5.
13
Figure 5: The example game displayed in a possible extensive form.
This tree diagram has been drawn in a way where it looks as if moves are sequential. This could indeed be
the case but need not be - a tree diagram can still be drawn with pairs of simultaneous moves as in this
example. A pathway through the tree, always descending, results in a payoff at the end of a branch.
Exercise: In this game we could draw the tree diagram with B’s moves first then A’s and this would also
be an equivalent way of representing the same game. Can you draw this alternative extensive form of this
game?
1.8 The Solution of a Game
Before we move on to the next chapter, let’s pause for a moment to briefly discuss what we are actually
trying to achieve by analysing games, i.e. what constitutes a solution of a game?
We know for example, if asked to solve a linear equation, like 2x + 4 = 0, that we have a unique solution
to the problem given by x = −2. If we were tasked with solving a quadratic, like x
2 − 3x + 2 = 0, then we
can have either two, one (repeated) or no real solutions (or two if we consider complex solutions), here we
have two solutions: x = 1 or x = 2. Maybe we are given a Diophantine equation with possibly infinitely
many solutions, or a system of equations. In short, we know what it means to solve an equation.
Question: But what does it mean to solve a game? What should a solution to a game consist of?
A solution to a game should tell the players playing the game how to play ‘optimally’, i.e a solution should
provide an ‘optimal’ strategy for each player in the game (notice this is for each player). With these
strategies we can deduce the resulting payoff for each player as part of the solution.
Notice that I have put quotation marks around the word optimal in the above. Indeed, what exactly we mean
by a strategy being optimal is a non-trivial question and is one we will work toward answering throughout
14
the module! For now, let’s just understand that to solve a game we must provide strategies for each player
that each need to fulfil some condition of optimality - precisely what this condition is we will develop in the
coming lectures.
Note that, as discussed above, equations for example, can have more than one solution. So what about
games? Can games have more than one solution? Or perhaps the more terrifying thought - some equations
have no solutions, so do some games have no solutions? Let’s eagerly press forward with these questions in
mind!
15
Chapter 2: Dominance, Best Response and Equilibria
In this chapter we will formalise many of the concepts seen throughout chapter 1. These include the notion
of dominated strategies and the concept of iteratively deleting dominated strategies. We also work towards
an important definition; that of an equilibrium in a game, which will be our answer as to what constitutes
‘optimal’ for a collection of strategies for each player to be a solution of a game.
It will be useful to develop some standard notation to use when analysing games. In this course we will
employ the following notation:
• In a game involving N ≥ 1 players, let’s refer to the players as player 1, player 2, · · · , player i, · · · ,
player N, for each i = 1, 2, · · · , N. Player 1 will typically be thought of as the first player and will
take their moves first in any sequential games, followed by player 2 and so on.
• Player i will have a non-empty set of pure strategies labelled Si and a typical strategy from this set
will be denoted si
. This strategy set may be finite or infinite.
• Let’s denote the payoff player i receives by playing strategy si against strategy sj from player j for
each j = 1, 2, · · · , i − 1, i + 1, · · · , N by
gi(s1, s2, · · · , si−1, si
, si+1, · · · , sN ).
Remark: Note here that throughout this course the notation g will be used to represent payoff functions.
This is for two reasons: one to represent the ‘gain’ of a player (hence the g), and second for sentimental
value as this was the notation the lecturer learned originally as an undergraduate! However, note that in
many books or papers in the subject area that this notation is not widespread. In fact it is generally more
common to see the notation u used (to represent a player’s utility) rather than g. Be aware if you read any
textbooks or articles that these, and others, are just different ways of denoting payoff functions.
Although we have said that this will be our general notation throughout the course, typically lots of what
we will encounter involves just two players. In such cases, this more general notation is often superfluous
and so we use the following:
• In a two-player setting we will refer to the two players as player A and player B. Player A will typically
be thought of as the first player and will take their moves first in any sequential games, followed by
player B. Player A will have pure strategies represented by a1, a2, · · · etc and the set of all their pure
strategies we will call As. Likewise B has pure strategies Bs = {b1, b2, · · · }. These sets may be finite
or infinite.
• We refer to the payoff player A receives by playing strategy ai against player B’s strategy bj by
gA(ai
, bj ). Likewise we denote gB(ai
, bj ) for the payoff player B receives by playing strategy bj against
player A’s strategy ai
.
2.1 The Prisoner’s Dilemma
Let’s look at another game, the famous Prisoner’s Dilemma. Two prisoners are currently held captive
and are suspected of committing a serious crime. There has been no evidence found to prove that either is
16
guilty, however should a prisoner testify against the other then the one testified against will be found guilty.
The prisoners are taken into separate rooms and interrogated simultaneously. They can either remain silent
and cooperate (strategies ac, bc) with each other by not testifying, or they can defect (strategies ad, bd) and
testify against the other.
If both prisoners cooperate, then each gets a smaller sentence of one year for some minor crimes that can
be pinned on them. If both defect, then each get a long sentence of five years. If one prisoner defects and
the other stays silent, then whoever defects gets let free and whoever stayed silent takes all the blame and
receives a double sentence of ten years. Figure 6 shows the normal form of the game.
Figure 6: The Prisoner’s Dilemma.
Activity: Play the game against a partner. In the classroom select two students and ask them to come to
the front and to play the game. First play without communication, then allow the prisoners to talk before
they make their choice and play again.
2.1.1 Discussion
Both players have an incentive to defect, so that the strategy pair (ad, bd) will be the predicted outcome
upon playing the game. This is similar to what we saw in the sweets dilemma only stronger: strategy d
(defect) gives a better payoff than c (cooperate) regardless of what the opponent does.
Notice however that even though the payoff pair (ac, bc) is better for both players, play results in the pair
(ad, bd) occurring. This often remains the case even when we allow our prisoners to communicate - both are
still incentivised to ‘rat the other one out’ and defect to receive a smaller sentence. Later, in chapter 5, we
will investigate cooperative game theory to see how we might obtain these better outcomes for both players.
This game shows that individual incentives may jeopardise a common good. This is a common theme in
17
game theory and we will see this concept occur a few times throughout the course. Of course this has
ramifications when we apply game theory to real world problems, see problem sheet 2 for examples.
2.2 Dominated Strategies
Let us now formally define what we mean when we say a particular strategy is dominated for a player. Since
most of what we will do involves two players, we begin with a simpler two-player definition.
Definition 2.6. We say that a strategy a ∈ As is strictly dominated (or ‘dominated’) by another strategy
a
′ ∈ As if
gA(a, b) < gA(a
′
, b), for all b ∈ Bs.
In other words, a
′
is always better for player A than a, regardless of what B plays.
Remark: Take care with the annoying English here. In the above definition a is dominated by a
′
, but,
equivalently, we sometimes say a
′ dominates a. These are both correct phrasings but take care to note that
in the second case the a and a
′
switch around. Don’t mix them up!
We will consider some games with more than two players, for which it is useful for us to have the more
general definition of dominance
Definition 2.7. In a game with N-players (N ≥ 2), then we say that a strategy si ∈ Si for player i is
strictly dominated (dominated) by another strategy s
′
i ∈ Si
if
gi(s1, s2, · · · , si
, · · · , sN ) < gi(s1, s2, · · · , s′
i
, · · · , sN ),
for all sj ∈ Sj , j = 1, 2, · · ·i − 1, i + 1, · · · , N.
2.3 The Defence of Rome
It’s the year 218BC and the great Carthaginian general Hannibal is preparing to lead his forces against
Rome. Let’s put ourselves in the shoes of the Roman consul Publius Cornelius Scipio and best prepare our
forces for Hannibal’s invasion.
There are two entrances to Rome; through the easy pass: the Iberian peninsula by boat, or through the
arduous pass: the mountainous Alps. We can choose to position our legion to guard either of these passes.
Hannibal will lead his army (which we will say is made up of two battalions worth of troops) through one
of these passes to Rome. If our Roman legion meets Hannibal’s army, we will destroy one of his battalions,
but if our army misses his army, we won’t destroy any battalions. However, if Hannibal chooses the hard
mountainous pass, one of his battalions will be destroyed via attrition in the process of making the gruelling
journey regardless of wether or not we meet his army.
Our payoff corresponds to the number of Hannibal’s battalions destroyed and Hannibal’s payoff to the number
of remaining battalions he has left once in Rome. In normal form the game is shown in figure 7.
18
Figure 7: The Defence of Rome.
Activity: Acting as the Roman general in this game, what should you do? Play the game in class.
2.3.1 Discussion
On first glance this might be unclear as to what our best action is in this game. Taking strategy a1 (protecting the easy pass) seems the ‘safer’ play (it guarantees us a payoff of 1) whereas taking strategy a2
(protecting the hard pass) has the potential to give a higher payoff but also to give us 0, so what should we
do?
The important insight comes from considering our opponents strategies. Take a step into the shoes of
Hannibal and let’s investigate his options. Hannibal’s strategy b1 (attack via the easy pass) scores at least as
highly, if not better, than his alternative strategy b2 (hard pass). Notice that this is not dominance (since b1
only scores at least as highly, if not better), but something slightly weaker which we call weak dominance.
Based on this revelation, it seems highly plausible that Hannibal will not chose his weakly dominated strategy
and thus will attack via the easy pass (b1). Knowing this, we can make our best play (our best response,
see shortly) and defend the easy pass, giving us a payoff of 1 rather than 0 if we defended the hard pass.
Remark: Doesn’t all of this seem useless given we know historically that Hannibal did choose the hard
pass? Is our game theoretic model irrelevant? Well for now note that we are still building up our intuition
into how to solve games. Indeed, the pair of strategies where both players choose the easy pass (a1, b1) is
a solution of this game. There are however more solutions which we will learn how to find later once we
talk about randomised strategies and degenerate games which should ease our fears that Hannibal was not
using sound tactical advice!
19
2.3.2 Weak Dominance
Let’s formally define what we mean by weak dominance.
Definition 2.8. We say that a strategy a ∈ As is weakly dominated by another strategy a
′ ∈ As if
gA(a, b) ≤ gA(a
′
, b), for all b ∈ Bs,
where at least one of these inequalities must be strict.
In other words, a
′
is never worse for A than a, and sometimes better, regardless of what B plays. For an
N-player game this definition becomes
Definition 2.9. In a game with N-players (N ≥ 2), we say that a strategy si ∈ Si for player i is weakly
dominated by another strategy s
′
i ∈ Si
if
gi(s1, s2, · · · , si
, · · · , sN ) ≤ gi(s1, · · · , s′
i
, · · · , sN ),
for all sj ∈ Sj , j = 1, 2, · · · , i − 1, i + 1, · · · , N, where at least one of these inequalities must be strict.
2.3.3 Payoff Equivalence
We give one more definition in the context of N-player games. We don’t expect to see this case very often,
but give it for completeness. The equivalent definition would hold in our two-player notation.
Definition 2.10. In a game with N-players (N ≥ 2), then we say that a strategy si ∈ Si for player i is
payoff equivalent to another strategy s
′
i ∈ Si
if
gi(s1, · · · , si
, · · · , sN ) = gi(s1, · · · , s′
i
, · · · , sN ),
for all sj ∈ Sj , j = 1, 2, · · · , i − 1, i + 1, · · · , N.
2.4 Best Response
Let’s consider the game shown in normal form in figure 8 where player A has three pure strategies.
20
Figure 8: An example game to motivate the concept of best response.
Activity: Think about which strategy you would play as player A. Can you defend each strategy choice
rationally?
Looking at the game in strategic form it seems there are no dominated strategies for either player, so making
an informed decision here on what we should do seems harder. We can justify strategy choices a1 and a2 in
the following way: suppose we believe that player B will play b1, then our best response to this is to play
a1, since this choice gives us the largest payoff if B plays b1. Alternatively, suppose we think it likely that
B plays b2, then we can justify choosing strategy a2 since this is our best response against b2.
But what about strategy a3? it is neither the best response against b1, nor against b2, yet it seems to yield
strong payoffs and is likely the choice that many of you would have made.
In the above we have made comments on our ‘belief’ about what player B will play. Let’s put a variable
to this to allow us to analyse the game in more detail. Let q ∈ [0, 1] be the probability that player B
chooses strategy b1; so then 1 − q is the probability they choose b2. Now we can formulate three equations
representing the expected payoffs to player A for playing each of their pure strategies. In the next chapter
we will formalise some notation when dealing with probabilities like this but for now let’s refer to each of
these quantities as gA(a1), gA(a2) and gA(a3). Calculating these expected payoffs we find
gA(a1) = 5q + 0(1 − q) = 5q,
gA(a2) = q + 4(1 − q) = 4 − 3q,
gA(a3) = 4q + 3(1 − q) = q + 3.
Graphing these on a pair of axes of q against gA gives figure 9.
21
Figure 9: Expected payoffs for each of player A’s pure strategies plotted against q.
This gives us a really nice visual picture of what’s going on here, and allows us to better argue why a3 is a
justifiable choice, for instance:
• Since I felt the probability that B would play b1 was less than 1/4, then my best response against
this is to play a2 since it gives the highest expected payoff in this case (the blue line is the highest for
q < 1/4).
• Since I felt the probability that B would play b1 was more than 3/4, then my best response against
this is to play a1 since it gives the highest expected payoff in this case (the red line is the highest for
q > 3/4).
• Since I felt the probability that B would play b1 was more than 1/4, but less than 3/4, then my best
response against this is to play a3 since it gives the highest expected payoff in this case (the green
line is the highest for 1/4 < q < 3/4).
This is the concept of best response, which we now define formally.
Definition 2.11. Consider an N-player game (N ≥ 2). We say that strategy si ∈ Si for player i is a best
response to the strategies s1, s2, · · · , si−1, si+1, · · · , sN for each of the other players if
gi(s1, s2, · · · , si−1, si
, si+1, · · · , sN ) ≥ gi(s1, s2, · · · , si−1, s′
i
, si+1, · · · , sN ), (1)
for all s
′
i ∈ Si
. That is, against the strategy choices sj , j = 1, 2, · · ·i − 1, i + 1, · · · , N for each of the other
players, the strategy si for player i results in the highest payoff.
22
Remark: A best response is not always unique. It is possible that for some strategies of our opponent(s)
we have multiple best responses, hence we usually refer to a best response when found in just that way:
a best response. When we know it is unique then we may say the best response or something similar.
2.5 The most important game in the world
We now come to the most important game in the world: football! In this section we will analyse the game
of penalty kicks (a minigame within a game of football). A penalty kick involves the attacker, a player from
team A who will run up to the ball and try to kick it into the net from 12 yards away to score a goal, and
a defender, a player from team B, who in this case is called a goalkeeper, who will try to stop the ball from
going into the goal by diving to block the ball.
We will model the game in a simplified manner. Player A is our attacker who will shoot to the left, the right
or down the middle of the goal. Player B will be our goalkeeper who can dive to the left or to the right
(you’ll explore the option of staying in the middle later on problem sheet 4). We will model the game using
the payoff matrix in figure 10 where the payoffs are related to the probability of a goal being scored.
Figure 10: Normal form of the penalty kick game.
Activity: Acting as the attacker, player A, which way would you shoot and why?
As before, let’s sketch up a graph to highlight our possible best responses. Let q ∈ [0, 1] be the probability
that the goalkeeper dives to the left (plays b1). Then the probability they choose b2 is just 1 − q and our
23
expected payoffs for each pure strategy are
gA(a1) = 4q + 9(1 − q) = 9 − 5q,
gA(a2) = 6q + 6(1 − q) = 6,
gA(a3) = 9q + 4(1 − q) = 4 + 5q.
Graphing these gives figure 11.
Figure 11: Expected payoffs in the penalty kick game.
Looking at the graph we can deduce some things. First something that might have seemed completely
obvious, but it’s good to know our analysis agrees: that if we think B will play b1 with probability greater
than 1/2, our best response is to play a3, and if we think B will play b1 with probability less than 1/2, our
best response is to play a1. In words, this means our best response is to shoot in the direction opposite to
the direction we think the goalkeeper will dive.
Our graph tells us something else interesting though. Notice that the blue line representing our expected
payoff from a2, shoot down the middle, is never the highest line, for any value of q. This means that this
strategy is never a best response to any of B’s strategies. In other words, there is no reason to ever play
a2, since we could always be doing better by playing something else.
In the context of penalty kicks this gives us a valuable lesson: never shoot down the middle! So if we could
just get that into the heads of the English players, then perhaps we’ll beat Germany at penalty kicks one of
these days...
In fact there is a strong connection between dominated strategies and those that are never best responses:
24
Proposition 2.12. A strategy that is never a best response to any of the opponents strategies is a dominated
strategy.
Proof. (⋄) To prove this we need to be familiar with the concept of mixed strategies (see chapter 3) as those
are important here. This result can then be conceptually understood fairly easily but to prove it formally is
a bit algebraically clunky. It is left as a diamond exercise if you’d like to try!
Remark: The keen eyed reader among you may have felt uneasy about this latest proposition. Indeed,
we have just argued that shooting down the middle (strategy a2) was never a best response to any of the
opponent’s strategies. This latest proposition then claims that it must be a dominated strategy. However,
we can spend a moment to check whether any of the pure strategies dominate one another and see that
this is not the case. So what’s going on here? Well it turns out that some mixed strategies are the
strategies that dominate a2, so that’s why we’ll return to this once we’ve seen what they are (once we’ve
seen mixed strategies in chapter 3, come back here and consider the strategy where you shoot left or right
with probability 1/2 each way for instance)!
2.6 Equilibria
We now come to the most central theme of mathematical game theory, equilibria. In fact, one might go so
far to say game theory is really the study of equilibria such is their importance. Let’s define what we mean
by this.
Definition 2.13. An equilibrium of an N-player game (N ≥ 2) is a profile of strategies, one for each
player, where each strategy in the profile is a best response to all the other strategies in the profile. In
other words the best response condition (1) holds for all players i = 1, 2, · · · , N.
Remarks:
• An equilibrium is often called a Nash equilibrium named after John Nash (1951) who proved that
an equilibrium always exists for finite strategy sets extended to include mixed strategies (we will see
what all this means in Chapter 3).
• One might ask why an equilibrium is such an important concept. Indeed, we can actually go so far to
say it is a necessary condition for a game theoretic solution. When we analyse a game to look for a
solution, then what should this solution entail? Well we should determine a strategy for each player to
follow which maximises their preferences, taking into account that all other players will do the same.
This collection of strategies (or strategy profile) necessarily must be in equilibrium, because otherwise
we would be recommending something inferior, self-defeating, to at least one of the players. If there
is at least one strategy that is not a best response to the others then that player is incentivised to
deviate from the strategy provided and use some other strategy which is a best response against the
other strategies. This is why the concept of equilibrium is so fundamental to the study of games and
a necessary condition for a game theoretic solution.
• This importance does not guarantee that such an equilibrium has to exist, however, nor does it mean
that players playing the game will always necessarily play such an equilibrium. For instance the game
theoretic model may be a simplification of the real world context or the game may simply be very
difficult to play optimally - consider the game of chess for example.
25
Much of the rest of this course is about seeking equilibria in games, so let’s get started with an example.
Example: Consider the game shown in figure 12 between players A and B. Find a solution (a pair of
strategies, one for each player, that are in equilibrium) to the game.
Figure 12: An example game in normal form.
Figure 13: Best response payoffs circled and boxed for each
player.
Solution: We can check each cell in the table to determine whether that pair of strategies are mutual best
responses. Alternatively some people find it useful to circle the payoffs corresponding to player A’s best
responses against each of player B’s strategies (here we circle 5 and 3 for A as a1 is the best response against
b1 and a2 the best response against b2), and to box the payoffs corresponding to player B’s best responses
against each of player A’s pure strategies (here this is b2 in both cases - which means that b1 is never a best
response so should be a dominated strategy, indeed one can check that is the case) as shown in figure 13.
Where a circle and box meet in a cell we have found a pair of strategies which are mutual best responses
and hence in equilibrium. Thus (a2, b2) is an equilibrium and hence a solution to the game. Shortly you will
be able to prove that this is the unique equilibrium of this game.
2.7 Games with multiple equilibria
Let’s look at some more examples of games and try to find their equilibria. In the following examples we
will see there are more than one equilibrium.
2.7.1 The Dating Game (The Battle of the Sexes)
Classically, the game known as the battle of the sexes is shown in figure 14. I prefer to refer to this game as the
dating game since its gender stereotypes are outdated though shouldn’t be taken too seriously anyway. In this
game players A and B are going on a date and each decides simultaneously and independently (unrealistic
nowadays with mobile phones and the ease of communication) whether to go to a fancy Shoreditch bar
(aB, bB), afternoon tea at a posh hotel (aT , bT ) or to the JCR (aJ , bJ ).
26
Figure 14: The Dating Game.
Activity: Play the game. In class select some volunteers to play the game. Then, let the volunteers have a
chat beforehand and play the game again.
2.7.2 Discussion
The game has two pure strategy equilibria: (aB, bB) and (aT , bT ) where both players go to the bar, or both
go to tea. Their individual preferences differ however making agreement on where to go non-simple. The
game is often referred to as a coordination game, as both players want to coordinate where they go - as a
result communication before the game often helps the players find a way to coordinate. There is one thing
we can all agree on - the JCR might not be the greatest place to go for a date!
2.7.3 The Class Investment Game
Let’s play another game. Each member of the class is a player in this game and the idea is simple, you can
either play strategy 1: invest in the class project, which costs you one sweet, or strategy 2: don’t invest,
which costs you nothing. If 80% or more of the class choose strategy 1 and invest, then everyone who
invested receives two sweets back, netting you a sweet in profit. Otherwise nothing comes of investing and
those players who invested lose their sweet.
Activity: Play the game in class with everybody raising their hand to invest or not. Everyone will close
their eyes during this vote so they don’t know what everyone else has done.
27
2.7.4 Discussion
Can we determine what are the equilibria in this game? Yes, the game is simple enough we might be able to
spot them. Equilibria occur when everyone is investing, or where no one is investing. In either one of
these situations there is no incentive for any player to change their strategy, whereas in all other situations
there is.
Activity: Elect a class spokesperson. Allow them 30 seconds to give a speech to the class to ‘rally the troops’
and try to convince everyone to invest. Then play the game again to try to reach the ‘good’ equilibrium.
Note: In the past I used to play this game with 90% as the requirement and never managed to reach it,
so I’ve lowered it to 80% in the hope to convince more of you to invest and win some sweets! This actually
means you are in essence playing an iterated game with future years of students. If you, as the current group
of students taking the course, refuse to invest at 80% then that compels me to lower this threshold even
further, making it easier for future students to reach - but this comes at a cost to you as the current group
as you risk losing out on sweets!
2.8 Iterative deletion of Dominated Strategies
We now come to formalising a technique we saw early on in the course. Recall when we played the everyone
bids game we reached a conclusion that everyone playing ‘0’ was an equilibrium. To reach this conclusion
we successively removed dominated strategies from the game and then removed strategies that had become
dominated when the dominated strategies were removed and so on. Let us now prove that this is justified.
We start by proving that it is valid to remove a dominated strategy from the game and not change the
solutions to the game.
Proposition 2.14. In an N-player game (N ≥ 2), G, with strategy sets S1, S2, · · · , SN , let si and s
′
i
be
two strategies for player i. Suppose s
′
i weakly dominates or is payoff equivalent to si. Consider then the
game G′ with the identical payoffs as G but where Si is replaced by Si − {si}. Then:
(a) Any equilibrium of G′
is an equilibrium of G.
(b) If s
′
i
dominates si, then G and G′ have the same equilibria.
Proof.
(a) Take an equilibrium of G′
. This is a possible set of strategies in the game G and is either an equilibrium
of G or, if not, then player i must benefit by switching to the extra strategy option si
. However, if
deviating to strategy si
in G was beneficial to player i, then player i could also deviate to s
′
i
instead,
since it weakly dominates/is payoff equivalent to si
. But s
′
i
is a possible strategy in G′
, so this violates
the fact that we initially had an equilibrium in G′
, since we have claimed player i can improve their
payoff by switching to s
′
i
. Hence this deviation cannot be beneficial to player i and so this equilibrium
of G′
is also an equilibrium in G.
(b) Suppose s
′
i dominates si
. Then the dominated strategy si
is never part of an equilibrium, since player
i could always deviate to s
′
i
to do better. Now any equilibrium in G therefore doesn’t contain si
, so it
28
is also a possible set of strategies in game G′ where it is also an equilibrium. Now by (a), vice-versa,
any equilibrium in G′
is also an equilibrium in G, hence G and G′ have the same equilibria.
This proposition means we can freely delete dominated strategies from games without changing the equilibria
of the game. However, we must be cautious when weakly dominated strategies are present. Removing these
will never introduce new equilibria, by (a) in the last proposition, but may result in losing equilibria from a
game as seen in the following example.
Example: Consider the game shown in figure 15.
Figure 15: An example where we would lose an equilibrium by deleting a weakly dominated strategy.
Figure 16: Best response payoffs circled and boxed for
each player.
Looking for pure strategy equilibria via whichever is your favourite method shows that we have two equilibria: (a1, b1) and (a2, b2). However, the equilibria using strategy b1 actually uses a weakly dominated
strategy of player B (notice b2 weakly dominates b1). This is an example of why we should not delete weakly
dominated strategies (here b1) when we are seeking to find all equilibria in a game. However, if we want to
find just a solution of a game, we may do this.
Let’s now look at the iterated deletion of dominated strategies.
Proposition 2.15. Consider a game G that upon performing a finite iterated deletion of dominated strategies
is reduced to a single strategy profile, s (i.e. every player has only one strategy left). Then the strategy profile
s is the unique equilibrium of G.
Proof. After n deletions of dominated strategies, let’s call the final reduced game G(n)
. Trivially this game
has s as an equilibrium because no player can deviate. By proposition 2.14, the previous game, G(n−1)
,
before the last dominated strategy was removed has the same unique equilibrium. Then, from G(n−1) we
go backwards again, applying proposition 2.14 to claim G(n−2) has the same unique equilibrium. Continuing
this process backward this holds true for the original game G.
29
Remarks:
• Example: The everybody bids game falls into this category.
• If this process results in finding a unique equilibrium from a single remaining strategy profile, we often
refer to the game as being dominance solvable.
• The order in which dominated strategies are removed does not matter, and several dominated strategies may be removed simultaneously (problem set 2 asks you to prove these claims).
• Based on the algorithmic form of the last proof, we may also reduce an initial game G to a state, say
G(3), upon removal of three iterations of dominated strategies, which, although may not yet be reduced
to a single strategy profile (be dominance solvable), is simpler and easier to solve than the original
game G. For example, in the dating game (section 2.7.1); we may delete strategy J (JCR) entirely
since this was a dominated strategy for both players. This then results in a 2 × 2 game which is easier
to solve than the original 3 × 3 game. This means we can use this iterated deletion process partially
and the resulting game will still have the same equilibria by proposition 2.14.
Let’s now solve a famous game by use of this iterated deletion of dominated strategies technique.
2.9 The Cournot Duopoly of Quantity Competition
In this section we discuss a famous economic model of competition between two competing firms who will
choose the quantity of their product they will produce, where the price decreases with the total quantity on
the market. This model is called a Cournot duopoly named after Augustin Cournot (1838) who proposed it.
The players in the game, A and B, are two firms who choose a non-negative quantity of some product to
produce, up to an upper bound M, say (beyond which their profits would become negative), so that the
strategy sets of the players are AS = BS = [0, M].
Let x and y be the strategies chosen by the players respectively. For simplicity, let’s assume there are no costs
of production of the product and that the total quantity produced x + y is to be sold at a price 12 − (x + y)
per unit, which is then each firm’s profit per unit. Thus the payoffs to the players, which we will take as
their profits, are
gA(x, y) = x(12 − x − y),
gB(x, y) = y(12 − x − y).
2.9.1 A finite version of the game
First let’s simplify the game a little and consider just a finite version, where the players strategy sets are
AS = BS = {0, 3, 4, 6}.
This gives us the normal form of the game as shown in figure 17.
30
Figure 17: A finite version of Cournot duopoly.
This is a game which we can apply the iterative deletion of dominated strategies to find a unique equilibrium.
First notice that strategy a0 is dominated by both strategies a3 and a4, and, since the game is symmetric
(B’s strategies and payoffs are the same as for A in all cases), b0 is dominated by b3 and b4. There are no
other dominated strategies. This means we can safely delete strategies a0 and b0 from the game and our
new game, see figure 18, will have the same equilibria as our original game.
Figure 18: The finite game with a0 and b0 deleted.
Next notice, upon deletion of a0 and b0, a6 is now dominated by a4 (and similarly b6 by b4), so we can
31
delete these strategies resulting in the game shown in figure 19.
Figure 19: The finite game with a0, a6, b0 and b6 deleted.
Finally, now that a6 and b6 have been deleted, we can see that a4 dominates a3 (and b4 dominates b3),
leaving (a4, b4) as the unique equilibrium of this dominance solvable game, see figure 20.
Figure 20: The finite game with only strategies a4 and b4 remaining.
Remark: Notice that, had both players agreed to make only 3 units of product (play a3 and b3), they
would both have been better off (received payoffs of 18 rather than 16), but, like in the prisoners dilemma,
this is not an equilibrium since in this case both firms would have incentive to deviate and make 4 units
to maximise their profits. This has lots of real world economic context: in fact if the two firms agreed to
partake in this deal then they would be acting as a cartel: a collusion of market users who work together to
dominate the market and drive up prices to maximise profits!
2.9.2 The infinite version of the game
Let’s return to the infinite version of the game and show that we can find the equilibrium of the game when
we allow both players to choose any strategy from the set [0, M]. First observe that we can take M = 12,
as if M > 12, then the price sold at 12 − x − y < 0, so choosing our quantity to produce at 0 would give us
zero profits and be better than making a loss by producing greater than 12 units.
32
Let’s take a look now from player A’s perspective. Player A’s best response to strategy y from player B
is to produce the quantity x which maximises A’s payoff gA(x, y), where
gA(x, y) = x(12 − x − y)
= −

x −
12 − y
2
2
+

12 − y
2
2
,
which has its maximum value at x =
12−y
2 = 6−y/2. Alternatively one could use calculus here to determine
the value of x giving d
dx gA(x, y) = 0. In more complicated cases this may be necessary.
A’s best response to strategy y by B, namely x = 6 − y/2, is unique, so because the game is completely
symmetric, player B’s best response y, to strategy x by A, is given by y = 6 − x/2. In order to have an
equilibrium, the strategies x and y must be mutual best responses, that is
x = 6 −
y
2
,
and y = 6 −
x
2
.
Solving this pair of linear equations gives the unique solution x = y = 4: the unique equilibrium of the game.
2.10 Games without a pure-strategy equilibrum
Not every game has an equilibrium in pure strategies (though we will see shortly that when we allow for
mixed strategies then any finite game does!). To motivate what we are going to do in the next chapter, let’s
look at some simple games that fall into this category.
2.10.1 Matching Pennies
In matching pennies player A and player B each simultaneously reveal a penny which can show either heads,
aH or bH, or tails, aT or bT . If the pennies match, player A wins player B’s penny, otherwise player B wins
the pennies. Figure 21 shows the strategic form of the game.
Figure 21: The game of matching pennies.
33
Activity: Play the game against your neighbour a few times. You can play for fun or for winning each
others sweets rather than pennies if you want some stakes involved!
As alluded to by the subsection heading and as you might have seen, there is no pure strategy equilibrium
in this game! At every outcome, one player has an incentive to deviate from their chosen strategy. So the
next question to ask is what is a solution to this game? What strategies should we recommend our players
play? Perhaps you have the intuition to guess this!
2.10.2 Rock - Paper - Scissors
This game is very well known so probably requires no introduction to you. Nevertheless the rules are simple
and go as follows: each of players A and B have three pure strategies available to them: rock (aR or bR),
paper (aP or bP ) and scissors (aS or bS). The idea is that rock beats scissors which beats paper which beats
rock. In other cases the game is drawn. Figure 22 gives the normal form of the game.
Figure 22: Rock-Paper-Scissors.
As in matching pennies, take a moment to convince yourself that no pair of pure strategies are in equilibrium
here. This time can you predict what is the equilibrium of the game?
34
Chapter 3: Mixed Equilibria
As seen in the games at the end of the last chapter, a game does not always have an equilibrium where every
player chooses their strategies deterministically. Nash (1951) proved that any finite game has an equilibrium
however if the players are allowed to use mixed (or sometimes called randomised) strategies. We will
define these now and motivate their use with an example game. Following from this we will prove Nash’s
theorem.
3.1 Mixed Strategies
Definition 3.16. A mixed (or randomised) strategy for a player is a self-imposed (i.e. chosen actively
and in control by the player) probability distribution over the player’s pure strategies.
In a game where player A has n pure strategies, so AS = {a1, a2, · · · , an} then a mixed strategy, α, for player
A is denoted as
α = (p1, p2, · · · , pn), or
α = p1a1 + p2a2 + · · · + pnan,
where 0 ≤ pi ≤ 1 for all i and P
i
pi = 1 so that we have a valid set of probabilities and a valid probability
distribution. It represents the idea that player A will choose to play strategy ai with probability pi for each i.
For a player A, we now extend the usual pure strategy set AS to the more general mixed strategy set,
denoted by AS, which is the infinite set containing all possible mixed strategies α for player A. Notice
that we refer to this new strategy set as being ‘more general’. Indeed this new set contains all the pure
strategies in the original set, as each pure strategy is a possible valid probability distribution over the players
pure strategies (it just assigns probability 1 to that particular pure strategy and probability 0 to everything
else). For example the pure strategy a3 for player A is equivalent to the mixed strategy α = (0, 0, 1, 0, · · · , 0).
When we include mixed strategies in games it often makes more sense to discuss the players expected
payoffs (since the payoff the player now gets upon a play of the game is determined by probabilistic
factors). Since we will focus our attention primarily on two-player games, for simplicity of notation we
give a two-player definition here.
Definition 3.17. Let player A have pure strategy set AS = {a1, a2, · · · , an} and player B have pure strategy
set BS = {b1, b2, · · · , bm}. Then if player A choses to play the mixed strategy α = (p1, p2, · · · , pn) ∈ AS and
player B choses to play the mixed strategy β = (q1, q2, · · · , qm) ∈ BS then the expected payoff to player
A is given by
gA(α, β) = Xn
i=1
Xm
j=1
gA(ai
, bj )piqj .
Player B has an analogous definition.
But what if AS and BS are infinite sets? In this case mixed strategies α and β become, in general, continuous
probability distributions over the pure strategy sets. The expected payoff for player A is then given by
gA(α, β) = Z
x
Z
y
gA(x, y)fA(x)fB(y)dxdy,
35
where for x ∈ AS and y ∈ BS, fA(x) and fB(y) are the probability density functions for α and β. Again
player B has an analogous definition.
Do these new mixed strategies mess up everything we have defined and studied so far? What about equilibria
for example? Well it turns out it’s good news, and everything just carries over to hold for these more general
mixed strategy sets. Indeed, starting with equilibria, we insist on the same definition, but extend it to take
mixed strategies into account.
Definition 3.18. We define a profile of mixed strategies (one for each player) to be a mixed equilibrium
(or simply equilibrium) if no player can improve their expected payoff by unilaterally changing their
strategy.
In the context of two-players we can write this definition equivalently as
Definition 3.19. A pair of mixed strategies, α
∗
for A and β
∗
for B, are said to be in mixed equilibrium if
gA(α
∗
, β∗
) ≥ gA(α, β∗
), for all α ∈ AS
and gB(α
∗
, β∗
) ≥ gB(α
∗
, β), for all β ∈ BS.
If α
∗ and β
∗ are in equilibrium, neither player has any incentive to change strategies. They are mutual best
responses to one another.
Just as we have extended our strategy sets, our calculation of payoffs and our definition of equilibrium, we
can extend our definitions of dominance and best response without worry to allow for mixed strategies too.
In all cases we will still use the same terminology: we may refer to a strategy as ‘strategy’, without specifying
whether it is mixed or pure for example, or to an equilibrium without making note on whether it is mixed
or pure. It should be clear in all cases what we mean, but where it is important to distinguish the difference
we will do so.
We have introduced a new concept and showed that we can extend the theory previously built up without
needing to start from scratch. Let’s look at an example game to help us get to grips with our new tool of
mixed strategies.
3.2 Compliance Inspections
Let’s consider a two-player inspection game. We will see how mixed strategies naturally emerge.
Player B will be our inspectee and can either comply (strategy b1) by fulfilling their legal obligation (e.g.
paying tax, TV/driving licence, paying for transport tickets) or they can cheat (strategy b2) and violate the
obligation. player A, the inspector, can chose to inspect (strategy a1) the inspectee to verify that they are
complying, but doing so incurs an inspection cost, or they can choose to not inspect (strategy a2). If the
inspectee is caught cheating they will pay a large fine. Figure 23 gives the strategic form of the game.
36
Figure 23: The inspection game.
Exercise: Check there are no pure strategy equilibria here.
A mixed strategy of player A is to play strategy a1, inspect, with some probability. This makes practical
sense contextually since inspecting every person incurs high costs. Inspecting only a few people reduces
costs, and, even if an inspection is not certain to happen, a suitably high chance of being caught cheating
should deter the inspectee from cheating.
Let p be the probability that player A plays a1, so then 1 − p is the probability that player A choses a2.
This ranging value of p ∈ [0, 1] then covers the whole of player A’s mixed strategy set AS including A’s two
pure strategies a1 and a2 when p = 1 and p = 0 respectively. Similarly, let q be the probability that player
B plays b1, and thus 1 − q the probability that player B chooses b2. Then the strategies α = (p, 1 − p) and
β = (q, 1 − q) make up the players mixed strategies respectively.
The question we want to ask is when does the strategy pair (α, β) form an equilibrium? Well in this case, by
definition, the strategies α and β must be best responses to each other. So, supposing player A is playing α,
then let’s consider player B’s pure strategy responses. Their expected payoff for playing b1, comply, is
gB(α, b1) = p.0 + (1 − p).0 = 0, (2)
and, on the other hand, their expected payoff for b2, cheat, is
gB(α, b2) = p.(−90) + (1 − p).10 = 10 − 100p. (3)
So what can we conclude having performed these calculations? Well, when 0 > 10 − 100p, or p > 1/10, then
player B gets a better expected payoff from b1, comply. But when 0 < 10 − 100p, or p < 1/10, then player
37
B does better from b2, cheat. Finally, note that player B is indifferent between their pure strategies if and
only if 0 = 10 − 100p, or p = 1/10.
But we’ve just introduced mixed strategies, so player B doesn’t have to choose a pure strategy you might
ask. Indeed, why can’t they also mix by choosing β = (q, 1 − q), for some 0 < q < 1? The answer is that
they can, but this mixing, however, can only be of any benefit if they are indifferent between their two
pure strategy choices b1 and b2! Why? Well, we will prove this formally soon, but indeed it is never optimal
for a player to assign any positive probability to a pure strategy which is inferior to another pure strategy
for a given mixed strategy of the opponent.
One way to see this concept in the inspection game is to consider what player B’s best response is when p
is lower than 1/10, say 1/100. In this case the expected payoff for cheat (b2) from equation (3) becomes 9.
Then we would be trying to weight a mixed strategy β where we assign a probability q towards the expected
payoff of 0 (from b1 in equation (2)) and a probability of 1 − q towards the expected payoff of 9 (from b2).
Clearly, since 9 > 0, the optimal assignment is to weight everything on the 9 (playing q = 0 or, in other
words, playing b2, cheat). This should help you see the concept that the only way a mixed strategy becomes
relevant is if the player is impartial between the expected payoffs of their pure strategies.
We can perform a similar analysis for player A. Consider a mixed strategy of player B, β = (q, 1 − q). Then
the expected payoffs for player A by playing each of their pure strategies are
gA(a1, β) = q.(−1) + (1 − q).(−6) = 5q − 6, (4)
gA(a2, β) = q.(0) + (1 − q).(−10) = 10q − 10. (5)
Thus, if player A inspects (plays a1) with probability p, i.e. plays mixed strategy α = (p, 1 − p), then their
expected payoff is
gA(α, β) = p(5q − 6) + (1 − p)(10q − 10)
= p(4 − 5q) + 10q − 10.
This is a linear function of p, with maximum at p = 0 if 4 − 5q < 0, or q > 4/5, and with maximum at p = 1
if 4 − 5q > 0, or q < 4/5. Only if q = 4/5, does this expected payoff not depend on the value of p.
We can therefore conclude that the unique (mixed) equilibria of the inspection game occurs when p = 1/10
and q = 4/5 where the mixed strategies
α =
1
10
a1 +
9
10
a2,
and β =
4
5
b1 +
1
5
b2,
are mutual best responses. In this case, the expected payoffs for each player are
gA(a1, β) = 5q − 6 = gA(a2, β) = 10q − 10 = −2,
for player A, and
gB(α, b1) = 0 = gB(α, b2) = 10 − 100p = 0,
38
for player B. The equilibrium probabilities p and q can be independently determined from these sets of
equations.
Remarks:
• An important concept to note here is the dependence on the opponent’s payoffs rather than the
player’s own in determining equilibrium. By this we mean that the equilibrium probability p = 1/10
is actually determined from the equations for player B’s expected payoffs, similarly for q and player
A. This is rather counter-intuitive. One might expect, for example, a more severe fine (changing −90
to −180) for being caught cheating lowers the probability of cheating in equilibrium. Surprisingly, it
does not! What does change from doing this is the probability p of inspection, which is reduced until
the inspectee is indifferent.
• A second important remark here is to discuss the need for mixing at all! If player A plays their mixed
strategy α = (1/10, 9/10) and player B can then equally comply or cheat (since they are indifferent
between them when A plays α), then why should they randomise at all? Indeed, they could simply
comply (play b1) and get a payoff of 0 for certain, simpler and safer, so why go through this process of
mixing at all? The reason is precisely the fact that because there is no incentive to choose one strategy
over the other, a player can mix, and only then can there be an equilibrium. If player B were to play
b1 for certain, then the best response of player A is to not inspect (play a2), but then b1 is not a best
response, so this is not an equilibrium.
3.3 Finding Mixed Equilibria by considering Pure Strategies
Let us now come to proving the important point we mentioned in the inspection game; that we only need
to mix over pure strategies that give maximal expected payoff.
Proposition 3.20. For any mixed strategies α
∗ of player A and β
∗ of player B, then
(a). max
α∈AS
{gA(α, β∗
)} = max
a∈AS
{gA(a, β∗
)} ,
(b). max
β∈BS
{gB(α
∗
, β)} = max
b∈BS
{gB(α
∗
, b)} .
Proof.
(a). Clearly
max
α∈AS
{gA(α, β∗
)} ≥ max
a∈AS
{gA(a, β∗
)} , (6)
since AS is a subset of AS. Conversely, let α = (p1, p2, · · · , pn), pi ≥ 0, P
i
pi = 1. Then
gA(α, β∗
) = X
i
pigA(ai
, β∗
), by definition,
≤
X
i
pi max
a∈AS
{gA(a, β∗
)} , because pi ≥ 0, for all i,
= max
a∈AS
{gA(a, β∗
)}
X
i
pi
= max
a∈AS
{gA(a, β∗
)} ,
39
so for all α, we have shown gA(α, β∗
) ≤ max
a∈AS
{gA(a, β∗
)}, hence
max
α∈AS
{gA(α, β∗
)} ≤ max
a∈AS
{gA(a, β∗
)} . (7)
Taking (6) and (7) together we have equality.
(b). Exercise: Similar proof to (a).
Remark: The previous proof inherently assumes that AS is a finite set, so that α has a finite number of n
components. Nevertheless the proof holds true in the case where the set AS is infinite, but we must replace
max with sup (the supremum) in this case.
Proposition 3.20 allows us to consider just the player’s pure strategies when trying to find maximal expected payoffs, rather than having to check an infinite set, AS, of mixed strategies. We now show that this
indifference is important in having a mixed equilibrium.
Definition 3.21. Let c be a constant. A mixed strategy, α
∗
, for player A is called an equaliser strategy
if
gB(α
∗
, b) = c, for all b ∈ BS.
Similarly for player B.
Proposition 3.22. In a two-player game, if α
∗
is an equaliser strategy for A using B’s payoffs and β
∗
is
an equaliser strategy for B using A’s payoffs, then (α
∗
, β∗
) is an equilibrium.
Proof. let cA and cB be constants. From the definition of equaliser strategies, we have
gA(ai
, β∗
) = cA, for all i,
gB(α
∗
, bj ) = cB, for all j.
This means that
gA(α
∗
, β∗
) = cA = gA(ai
, β∗
),
for all i since α
∗
is a mixture of ai
’s. Similarly
gB(α
∗
, β∗
) = cB = gB(α
∗
, bj ),
for all j since β
∗
is a mixture of bj ’s. By proposition 3.20 there are no other mixed strategies for the players
that can do better, so these strategies are mutual best responses and are in equilibrium.
Example: Consider the following game with normal form shown in figure 24.
40
Figure 24: An example game.
There are two equilibria in pure strategies, (a1, b1) and (a2, b2), but are there any other equilibria? Let’s seek
a mixed strategy equilibrium. We need an equaliser strategy α for A using B’s payoffs and an equaliser
for B, β, using A’s payoffs. A’s payoffs are shown in figure 25 and B’s in figure 26.
Figure 25: A’s payoffs in a table. Figure 26: B’s payoffs in a table.
Using A’s payoffs, setting β = (q, 1 − q), we can calculate A’s expected payoffs
gA(a1, β) = 2q − (1 − q) = 3q − 1,
gA(a2, β) = −3q + (1 − q) = 1 − 4q,
using these, if β is an equaliser strategy for B, then we must have equality, i.e. 3q − 1 = 1 − 4q which gives
q = 2/7. Thus B has the equaliser strategy
β =
2
7
b1 +
5
7
b2.
Exercise: Using B’s payoffs as shown in figure 26 find an equaliser strategy for A. What is the game’s
mixed equilibrium?
3.4 Geometry of Games
Let’s take a short detour to discuss a little bit about the geometry of games. To keep things simple and visual
(at least for me who can barely handle visualising things in three dimensions let alone anything higher!),
41
we will look at two-player games where each player has two pure strategies, though the concepts extend to
more general games with more players and more strategies.
Let’s take a 2 × 2 game in normal form as shown in figure 27.
Figure 27: A general 2 × 2 game in normal form.
We have labelled each payoff pair with a circled number ○1 ,○2 ,○3 and ○4 . To visualise the game geometrically, we plot each point ○1 ,○2 ,○3 and ○4 in the (x, y)-plane where the x coordinate is the payoff to player
A and the y coordinate the payoff to B.
Let α = (p, 1 − p) and β = (q, 1 − q), where 0 ≤ p, q ≤ 1, be mixed strategies for A and B. Then we can
write down expressions for any possible x and y coordinates representing possible expected payoffs of the
players. For x we find
x = gA(α, β) = pqgA(a1, b1) + p(1 − q)gA(a1, b2) + q(1 − p)gA(a2, b1) + (1 − p)(1 − q)gA(a2, b2). (8)
A similar expression holds for the y coordinate.
So now comes the pressing geometric question: which points (x, y) ∈ R
2
correspond to possible payoff pairs
and hence possible mixed strategy pairs for the players? This set of all such points we call S, the payoff
set for the game.
3.4.1 The Convex Hull
Let’s take a detour from that question for a moment and talk about something called the convex hull.
Suppose we have a set of points x1, x2, · · · , xn ∈ R
m, then we can form their convex hull, C, which
consists of all the points of the form
p1x1 + p2x2 + · · · + pnxn,
where 0 ≤ pi ≤ 1 and P
i
pi = 1.
42
For example, when m = 2 and using our points ○1 ,○2 ,○3 and ○4 , then the convex hull would look something
like the shaded area shown in figures 28 and 29.
Figure 28: Possible convex hull of our game. Figure 29: Another possible convex hull of our game.
The convex hull, C, is a convex set; which means for any two points in C, the whole of the line segment
joining them is also in C. We will use this property of convex sets a few times throughout the course.
3.4.2 The Payoff set
So let’s return to our question. Which points (x, y) are in our payoff set, S? Firstly, notice that any point
of S must lie in the convex hull, C, of all the points (x, y) arising from the pure strategies (○1 ,○2 ,○3 and
○4 ). From (8) we can see this as the coefficients always satisfy 0 ≤ pq, p(1 − q),(1 − p)q,(1 − p)(1 − q) ≤ 1
and these all sum to 1, so we can’t reach a point beyond the convex hull. So now the question becomes is S
just the whole of the convex hull, C, formed from ○1 ,○2 ,○3 and ○4 ?
It’s not. Well not necessarily anyway. This is because the players are playing independently, so there are
some convex combinations of payoff pairs that we cannot create.
Going back to our game in figure 27, the payoff set S of this game depends on the orientation of the points
○1 ,○2 ,○3 and ○4 . What we find is that for two points in the same row or column of the normal form
display, i.e. for ○1 and ○2 , ○3 and ○4 , ○1 and ○3 , and ○2 and ○4 , then the line joining them also belongs
to S. To see why this is the case (at least for the x coordinate) think about taking p = 1, p = 0, q = 1
and q = 0 respectively in (8). We can obtain all convex combinations between these pairs of points in this way.
However, S does not necessarily include the line segment joining points ○1 and ○4 or points ○2 and ○3 . So
what do the boundaries look like between these pairs of points? Referring to (8), changing the value of p
can be thought of as weighting whether we are using the payoffs from row 1 or from row 2 (when p = 1 we
use the payoffs in row 1 of the game, as p decreases to 0 we have less weighting on the first row and more
weighting on the second row). Similarly changing q results in weighting on using the payoffs from column 1
or column 2. As we vary these smoothly, a curve drawn out by the envelope of the lines forming the possible
convex combinations of payoffs forms one remaining curved boundary. Figures 30 and 31 give illustrations
of a possible payoff set S shaded in grey.
43
Figure 30: A schematic of a possible payoff set S for our
2×2 game showing three purple lines representing varying
p for three different fixed q values.
Figure 31: The same payoff set where orange lines
for all q for three fixed p values are drawn.
To construct a payoff set, first the lines joining ○1 and ○2 , ○3 and ○4 , ○1 and ○3 , and ○2 and ○4 are drawn.
By fixing a value of q and then varying through all possible p values we draw out a line of possible payoffs,
three different examples of these lines are drawn on figure 30 coloured purple. Doing this for every possible
value of q and then varying through all p we find that the envelope of these lines forms a curved boundary
between either ○1 and ○4 or between ○2 and ○3 . Alternatively, one can think about this process the other
way around by considering the payoff pairs found by fixing a value of p and varying through all possible
q values. An example of three lines drawn out by this process are shown in figure 31, coloured in orange.
Either method produces the same envelope. These boundaries can be tricky to determine analytically and
need to be found on a case by case basis, though if we are not too concerned by the explicit equation of
such curves, then numerically they are fairly easy to produce. Everything within and on our boundaries
then belongs in the payoff set S. You can see that this is in general a subset of the convex hull of the points
representing the pure strategies.
We will do an example using the dating game next where we will see that by hand we can roughly sketch
the payoff set, I’ll then leave you the challenge of determining the equation of the curved boundary! .
Example: Consider the version of the dating game shown in figure 32.
44
Figure 32: A dating game with two pure strategies for either player.
Let’s draw its payoff set S. Well (x, y) ∈ S ⇔ for some p, q ∈ [0, 1] we have
(x, y) = pq(2, 1) + p(1 − q)(−1, −1) + (1 − p)q(−1, −1) + (1 − p)(1 − q)(1, 2). (9)
Joining the pairs of pure strategies that we know form straight line boundaries leaves us with just the curved
boundary to find. This will be between the points (1, 2) and (2, 1) which (as shown in figure 33) we can
determine roughly by considering the envelope of the orange lines. The final payoff set is shown in figure 33.
Figure 33: Payoff set S for the example dating game.
Exercise: (⋆) Using (9) can you show that the equation of the parabolic boundary is given by
5(x − y + 1)2 = 4(3x − 2y + 1).
45
3.5 Existence of an Equilibrium
We now state and prove arguably the most famous result in game theory: Nash’s theorem on the existence
of an equilibrium in finite games.
Theorem 3.23 (Nash (1951)). Every finite game has at least one equilibrium.
Proof. We will prove this in the case where the game is a finite (an n × m) two-player game to simplify
notation. The proof can be extended in the same manner to N-players. Let C = AS × BS be the product
of the mixed strategy sets of our players A and B. We will use the property that this set C is compact and
convex (this is because the sets AS and BS are convex and compact and the product of compact, convex
sets is compact and convex). We have mentioned what it means for a set to be convex in the last section,
compactness can be thought of as the set having no ‘holes’ - everything in its interior is filled with elements
from the set, there are no gaps.
Our plan will be to construct a function f : C 7→ C which maps a pair of mixed strategies (α, β) to
another pair f(α, β) = (α
∗
, β∗
) such that f has the following property. A mixed strategy of player A, i.e.
α = (p1, p2, · · · , pn) will have a component pi changed to p
∗
i by f such that it will increase (i.e. p
∗
i > pi) if
the pure strategy ai does better than the current expected payoff
gA(α, β) = Xn
i=1
Xm
j=1
gA(ai
, bj )piqj .
If the pure strategy ai does worse, then pi will be decreased to p
∗
i unless pi
is already 0. A similar process
will occur for the components of β.
Now, in equilibrium, α is a best response to β and all the sub-optimal pure strategies have probability zero.
This means that through our function f, the mixed strategy α will not change, i.e. α
∗ = α. Similarly,
β
∗ = β if β is a best response to α. The idea of this discussion is to notice that if indeed we can create a
function f with this property, then the equilibrium property is equivalent to f(α, β) = (α
∗
, β∗
) = (α, β), i.e.
that the function f has a fixed-point. Now let’s go about trying to create such an f.
To define a function f with the property described, consider the following functions
χ : AS × BS 7→ R
n
,
ψ : AS × BS 7→ R
m.
Let χi(α, β) be the ith component of χ(α, β) and let ψj (α, β) be the jth component of ψ(α, β). We define
these component functions by
χi(α, β) = max {0, gA(ai
, β) − gA(α, β)} , i = 1, 2, · · · , n,
ψj (α, β) = max {0, gB(α, bj ) − gB(α, β)} , j = 1, 2, · · · , m.
The difference between gA(ai
, β) and gA(α, β) is positive if the pure strategy ai gives a higher expected
payoff than the mixed strategy α does against β, is zero if it gives the same payoff, and is negative if it gives
less. The component χi(α, β) is then exactly this difference, except it is replaced by 0 if the difference is
negative. ψj (α, β) is defined analogously. This means that χ(α, β) is a nonnegative vector in R
n and ψ(α, β)
46
is a nonnegative vector in R
m. These functions are also continuous.
Through our function f we will update the vectors α and β by replacing α with α +χ(α, β) to get α
∗
, and β
by β + ψ(α, β) to get β
∗
. Both sums are non-negative, however, in general these new vectors are no longer
necessarily valid mixed strategies because their components do not necessarily sum to one. Thus, we first
‘re-normalise’ them in the following way. Let
p
∗
i =
pi + χi(α, β)
P
i
pi +
P
i χi(α, β)
=
pi + χi(α, β)
1 + P
i χi(α, β)
, (10)
q
∗
j =
qj + ψj (α, β)
P
j
qj +
P
j ψj (α, β)
=
qj + ψj (α, β)
1 + P
j ψj (α, β)
, (11)
where then we define α
∗ = (p
∗
1
, p∗
2
, · · · , p∗
n
) and β
∗ = (q
∗
1
, q∗
2
, · · · , q∗
m). Now α
∗ and β
∗ are valid mixed
strategies. We finally define the function f : C 7→ C as
f(α, β) = (α
∗
, β∗
),
with α
∗ and β
∗ as defined above with their components as given in (10) and (11).
Next we need to show that our constructed function f has the property that we have an equilibrium of the
game when f has a fixed point.
Claim:
(α, β) is an equilibrium ⇐⇒ f(α, β) = (α, β).
Proof of claim:
(⇒): Suppose (α, β) is an equilibrium. Then, by definition
gA(ai
, β) ≤ gA(α, β),
for all i = 1, 2, · · · , n. This means that χi(α, β) = 0 for all i = 1, 2, · · · , n and it follows that pi = p
∗
i
and
hence α = α
∗
. In a similar manner we can show β = β
∗
.
(⇐): We will prove this direction by contradiction. Assume that α
∗ = α and β
∗ = β but (α, β) is not an
equilibrium. Then either:
There exists α
′
such that: gA(α
′
, β) > gA(α, β), or
There exists β
′
such that: gB(α, β′
) > gB(α, β).
Let’s assume it’s the first of these possibilities (the second possibility follows in a similar manner). Let
α
′ = (p
′
1
, p′
2
, · · · , p′
n
), then, by definition
gA(α
′
, β) = Xn
i=1
p
′
i
gA(ai
, β).
Thus, there must exist an i for which gA(ai
, β) > gA(α, β). Otherwise, if this were not the case, then we
contradict gA(α
′
, β) > gA(α, β) because
gA(α
′
, β) ≤
Xn
i=1
p
′
i
gA(α, β) = gA(α, β).
47
Now for this value of i:
χi(α, β) = max {0, gA(ai
, β) − gA(α, β)} > 0,
and thus P
i χi(α, β) > 0. Now consider
gA(α, β) = Xn
i=1
pigA(ai
, β),
so gA(ak, β) ≤ gA(α, β), for some k, with pk > 0. Otherwise, if this were not the case gA(ak, β) > gA(α, β)
for all k with pk > 0 but then
gA(α, β) = X
k
pkgA(ak, β)
> gA(α, β)
X
k
pk
= gA(α, β),
which is nonsense. For this value of k, we have
χk(α, β) = max {0, gA(ak, β) − gA(α, β)} = 0,
and
p
∗
k =
pk + χk(α, β)
1 + P
i χi(α, β)
=
pk
1 + P
i χi(α, β)
< pk.
Hence α
∗ ̸= α (since not all pi
’s are equal). But this is a contradiction since initially we assumed α
∗ = α.
Hence (α, β) must be an equilibrium.
Thus our claim holds. This means we have shown that if our function f(α, β) has a fixed point then these
pair of strategies are an equilibrium of the game.
We have one thing left to show, that our function always has a fixed point. For this we invoke Brouwer’s
fixed point theorem, which states that a continuous function from a closed, bounded, convex set C to itself
always has at least one fixed point. Indeed, our function operating on a set which is convex and compact to
itself, means it satisfies the requirements of the fixed point theorem and so we always have at least one fixed
point, and hence the game always has at least one equilibrium.
We dedicate the remainder of this chapter to developing techniques that we can use to find all the equilibria
in small games.
3.6 Finding Equilibria by checking Subgames
We have seen how to find mixed equilibria in a 2 × 2 game (the inspection game for example) through use
of ensuring indifference between the two pure strategies, but what about in slightly larger games. Let’s do
an example involving a 3 × 2 game, shown in figure 34.
48
Figure 34: A 3 × 2 game.
First, let’s look for any pure strategy equilibria. Indeed, we find that (a1, b1) is a pure strategy equilibrium.
This is the only one. What about mixed equilibria? How do we tackle finding any of these that might be
present?
In this section we will look at how we might restrict the game into smaller ‘subgames’ of the original game,
then find their equilibria, and check whether these are equilibria of the whole game. First, let’s restrict
player A to just strategies a1 and a2.
Exercise: In this case show that (α1, β1) = ((1/3, 2/3),(2/3, 1/3)) and (a2, b2) are two new equilibria with
expected payoffs for A given by gA(α1, β1) = 2/3 and gA(a2, b2) = 2.
To guarantee that these equilibria are also equilibria of the whole game (the game with strategy a3 included)
we check the expected payoff from these strategies against any other pure strategies that were excluded from
the full game. In this case this is just strategy a3 for player A. So, testing strategy a3 against strategy β1
we find:
gA(a3, β1) = (−1).
2
3
+ 3.
1
3
=
1
3
<
2
3
= gA(α1, β1),
which is smaller than that found from strategy α1. This means that α1 is a best response to β1 when considering the whole game (since we have shown a3 performs worse than α1, which is a mix of a1 and a2 and so
would have no positive weighting in an equilibrium). Hence we can conclude (α1, β1) = ((1/3, 2/3),(2/3, 1/3))
is an equilibrium of the original game.
However, checking the other subgame equilibrium found, against b2 player A’s best response is a3, hence the
pure strategy equilibrium (a2, b2) found in the subgame is not an equilibrium of the full game (we knew this
49
already as we checked the game for all pure strategy equilibria initially). Now let’s check the next restricted
2 × 2 subgame, where player A can chose a1 or a3.
Exercise: Show that in this subgame the only equilibrium is the one found already (a1, b1).
Lastly, let’s check the final possible subgame, where player A can chose a2 or a3.
Exercise: Show that in this subgame the only equilibrium is (α2, β2) = ((3/4, 1/4),(1/2, 1/2)) with
gA(α2, β2) = 1.
Checking the removed strategy a1 against β2 we find
gA(a1, β2) = 1.
1
2
+ 0.
1
2
=
1
2
< 1 = gA(α2, β2),
so indeed α2 is a best response to β2 in the whole game, and thus is also an equilibrium of the whole game.
This means we can conclude that in the original game, all equilibria are
(a1, b1),
1
3
,
2
3
, 0

,

2
3
,
1
3
 and 0,
3
4
,
1
4

,

1
2
,
1
2
 .
Remark: One question you might have here however is how do we know that there is no equilibrium where
player A mixes between all three of their pure strategies (since by splitting the game into all the 2 × 2
subgames we wouldn’t find an equilibria of this form)?
This is a good question. The answer is because player B has only one probability, q, to play with, meaning
that we don’t have enough freedom to satisfy two equations (one being indifference between a1 and a2 and
another indifference between a2 and a3, where indifference between a1 and a3 would then hold automatically).
Nevertheless, in games where player B has just two pure strategies, there is a possibility that some value
for q does, in fact, satisfy both indifference equations simultaneously. This leads us into the concept of
degeneracy, which we will investigate in section 3.8, and on problem sheet 3 you will investigate a game
of this form. In games where player B has more than two pure strategies however, then we certainly have
sufficient degrees of freedom and mixing over all three pure strategies is very possible.
3.7 The Upper Envelope Method
We now discuss an alternative method for finding all the equilibria in games where one player has just two
pure strategies: the upper envelope method. We have actually already seen this a few times earlier in the
course when we introduced the concept of best response and analysed a few games, including penalty kicks.
We showcase it again here using the game from the last section to show how we can use these diagrams to
find all the equilibria.
From the game shown in figure 34, player A’s expected payoffs against β = (q, 1 − q) for each of their pure
50
strategies are given by
gA(a1, β) = q,
gA(a2, β) = 2 − 2q,
gA(a3, β) = 3 − 4q.
Graphing these against q we arrive at figure 35.
Figure 35: The upper envelope diagram for the example 3 × 2 game.
We call this graph an upper envelope diagram. The upper envelope itself is highlighted with a grey
shading in figure 35. It turns out from these diagrams we can very easily determine all the game’s equilibria!
The green and blue lines intersect when q = 1/2 and the red and blue lines intersect when q = 2/3 (these
values appearing should make you excited when we think back to what we found the equilibria to be in this
game in the last section). At each of these intersection points, as well as at both end points along the upper
envelope we can find the mixed strategies of the players (these will be pure strategies at end points) and
check if they are in equilibrium.
This leaves us with just four points to check. Indeed, when q = 1/2, then with player A mixing between a2
and a3 (since the blue and green lines relate to these two pure strategies) we find that p = 3/4 to make B
indifferent. This is the equilibrium (α2, β2) we found in the last subgame earlier. When q = 2/3 then mixing
between a1 and a2 we find p = 1/3 for indifference of player B and this gives us the equilibrium (α1, β1)
found earlier. Lastly we check the endpoints, representing pairs of pure strategies, given by q = 0 so b2 being
played by B with A playing a3 (since the green line is the upper envelope here). This turns out not to be
an equilibrium, but when q = 1 so B is playing b1, and when A plays a1 (since the red line is highest) then
this is indeed the final equilibrium (a1, b1) found previously.
51
The upper envelope method is particularly useful when one player has a large number of pure strategies and
the other has two. On problem sheet 3 you will be tasked to find all equilibria in a 5×2 game. Considering all
the separate 2×2 games would result in needing to check ten different subgames, much more time consuming
than checking the intersections and end points along the upper envelope.
3.8 Degenerate Games
Let’s finish this chapter by looking at a final game, a threat game, and try to determine all its equilibria.
Unfortunately, just as we might feel like we have some sound methods of finding all equilibria, we will see
things become slightly more complicated in this case. Figure 36 gives the normal form of the threat game
we are interested in.
Figure 36: A threat game with a weakly dominated strategy for player B.
A quick check for pure strategy equilibria shows that both (a1, b1) and (a2, b2) are equilibria. But does the
game have any mixed equilibria? Well, let’s analyse the game in our usual manner and take a look. Let
α = (p, 1 − p) and β = (q, 1 − q) be mixed strategies for either player. Then
gA(a1, β) = 1,
gA(a2, β) = 2 − 2q,
so player A is indifferent when q =
1
2
, and
gB(α, b1) = 3p,
gB(α, b2) = 2 + p,
so player B is indifferent when p = 1, i.e. player A plays a1. This is not surprising, indeed, notice that
strategy b2 weakly dominates strategy b1... so it can only be in the case that we know player A is playing
a1 that player B can be indifferent (otherwise they would play b2 if there was any positive probability on
a2 by A).
52
So what have we learned? The game has two pure strategy equilibria (a1, b1), (a2, b2) and a mixed equilibria
(a1,(1/2, 1/2)) where only player B mixes. Is this all? What about the strategy pair (a1,(3/4, 1/4)), or the
strategy pair (a1,(7/8, 1/8)), are these in equilibrium?
Exercise: Find the expected payoffs for each player for these pairs of strategies. Show that they too are
indeed equilibria!
So it seems there are more equilibria that our previous method didn’t recover. Well this is not precisely
true. Observe what we concluded from the first pair of equations. We insisted that these expected payoffs
were equal to find that q = 1/2. But, now think about what we learned from the second pair of equations,
that we need to take p = 1, meaning that strategy a2 is being played with 0 probability in equilibrium. This
means that we no longer need to insist that gA(a1, β) = gA(a2, β), since a2 is not being played anyway! All
that matters in equilibrium is that a1 is the best response to β; i.e. we need:
gA(a1, β) ≥ gA(a2, β), or
1 ≥ 2 − 2q, or
q ≥
1
2
.
So, what we have actually found is an infinite family of equilibria of the form (a1,(q, 1 − q)), where
1/2 ≤ q ≤ 1. The two extreme cases end up being two of the equilibria we found earlier.
The reason why we refer to this game as a ‘threat’ game is related to these equilibria. Even though b2
weakly dominates b1, by threatening to play b1 with sufficiently high probability, then player A is forced into
playing strategy a1. Let’s now define when a two-player game is termed degenerate and will have this issue
as encountered in the threat game.
Definition 3.24. (Degenerate Game) A two-player game is called degenerate if some player has a mixed
strategy that assigns positive probability to exactly k pure strategies so that the other player has more than
k pure best responses to that mixed strategy.
Remark: This definition holds in the case when k = 1 (as in the threat game example) where the mixed
strategy in the definition is a pure strategy (i.e. it mixes over k = 1 pure strategies).
On problem sheet 3 you will encounter more degenerate games including a 2 × 3 degenerate game.
53
Chapter 4: Zero-Sum Games
Zero-sum games are two-player games that are strictly competitive; meaning that the interests of both
players are directly opposed. This means, for any two strategies, α for A and β for B, that
gA(α, β) = −gB(α, β) = g(α, β). (12)
As seen in (12), for this reason, we often drop the subscripts and let g(α, β) represent the payoff to player A
where then −g(α, β) is the payoff to B (sometimes we refer to the payoff g(α, β) as the cost to B). Notice
that (12) means that the sum of payoffs to the players in any outcome of the game is zero, hence the naming
convention: zero-sum games.
4.1 The Duelist’s Game
Let’s play a game. This is a zero-sum game, meaning it is a game of strict competition between our two
players: our two duelists, player A and player B. Our two duelists each have a gun loaded with just one
bullet each. They start at a unit distance apart and simultaneously start walking towards each other. Each
duelist must decide when they want to fire their gun (i.e. at what distance apart to fire).
If one duelists hits the other, then they win (let’s say) one point and the other (the one who has been hit)
loses a point. If a duelist fires and misses then they lose a point and the other wins a point (since the one
who hasn’t fired can wait until the duelists are adjacent where we will assume that they cannot miss with
a point blank shot). If both duelists fire simultaneously then if both hit, or if both miss, then they each
receive nothing but lose nothing.
Activity: Play the game (with pretend guns!) in class with some volunteer duelists.
4.1.1 Discussion
First note that the players have infinite pure strategy sets AS and BS in this game (choices of a value in
the range [0, 1]). Nevertheless we can still try to determine what might be good strategies for the duelists.
The first question to ask then, is what properties are important in determining a possible optimal strategy?
Well from the position of a particular duelist, say A, what we care about at any distance is the probability
that we can hit our opponent at that distance, as well as the probability of being hit by our opponent at
that distance, so we need to know or have good approximations of these probability functions. Let’s denote
them as
pA(a) = Probability that player A hits at distance a,
pB(b) = Probability that player B hits at distance b,
where a, b ∈ [0, 1].
Exercise: Show that the payoff to player A, if player A shoots when the distance apart is a and player B
54
shoots when the distance apart is b, is given by
g(a, b) =



2pA(a) − 1, if a > b,
1 − 2pB(b), if a < b,
pA(a) − pB(b), if a = b.
Exercise: We still need to try and find an optimal strategy for each player in this game (an equilibrium).
Perhaps a good first step is to try and think what would be best play if the two players were entirely equal
in ability (i.e. that pA and pB were the same functions). Can you predict what is optimal play in this case?
Show that your guess is an equaliser strategy for both players and hence gives an equilibrium and solution
of the game. Can you then see how to generalise this case to when the functions pA(a) and pB(b) are not
equal?
4.2 Lower Envelopes and Zero-Sum Games
Let’s look at another example zero-sum game, shown in figure 37.
Figure 37: An example zero-sum game. Figure 38: The example zero-sum game displayed in normal
form in its usual manner.
From the game shown in normal form, notice how the payoffs for player B are indeed always negative the
payoff for player A in every outcome of the game. This means the game is zero-sum. Usually, instead of
representing the normal form of the game as in figure 37, we do so instead as in figure 38.
This form of depicting the game uses only one payoff in each cell, that of player A. This avoids writing the
superfluous second payoff for player B since, in the case of a zero-sum game, we know this payoff is simply
negative the payoff shown for player A. By doing this we can also tell a game is zero-sum just by looking at
its normal form by noting that only one payoff is shown in each cell.
As is usual, let’s find all the equilibria of the game. First notice there are no pure strategy equilibria, so we
seek mixed strategy equilibria. To help us with this, and to motivate our next insight into these zero-sum
games, let’s draw something very similar to an upper envelope diagram for this game. Denoting a mixed
55
strategy for player A by α = (p, 1−p), then let’s graph g(α, b) for each pure strategy (b1, b2 and b3) of player
B, against p, as shown in figure 39.
Figure 39: The lower envelope diagram for the example zero-sum game.
This diagram is slightly different to the upper envelope diagrams we have seen so far which graphed player
A’s expected payoffs against q (or, alternatively, player B’s expected payoffs against p), since it graphs player
A’s expected payoffs against p. We call this a lower envelope diagram.
So how do we analyze this diagram? Well these payoffs to player A are essentially costs for player B, so
the best response costs to player B are given by the minimum of these lines, defining the lower envelope,
shaded with a grey squiggle on figure 39. There are two intersection points on the lower envelope, where the
red and blue lines intersect, at p = 2/5, and where the blue and green lines intersect, at p = 2/3. At these
points player B can mix, but when p = 2/5 then it turns out player A can’t be made indifferent: letting
β = (q, 1 − q), we find
g(a1, β) = 3 + 3q,
g(a2, β) = 2 − 2q,
and these can never be made equal for any q ∈ [0, 1]. However, when p = 2/3 then we find the unique
equilibrium of the game given by (exercise):
(α, β) = 2
3
,
1
3

,

0,
5
6
,
1
6
 .
Let’s now take a slightly different approach and think about how player A can interpret the lower envelope
in a zero-sum game. Suppose, regardless of what player B is doing, player A intends to secure some guaranteed (albeit expected) payoff. This can be done by playing a strategy corresponding to a point on the
56
lower envelope (since this is the lowest possible expected payoff A can attain when playing this strategy).
By then maximising over the lower envelope for some choice of p, player A maximises this ‘guaranteed’
expected payoff.
Referring back to figure 39, it is clear this maximum expected payoff (maximum height of the lower envelope) occurs when p = ˆp = 2/3. The corresponding strategy ˆα = (2/3, 1/3) = (ˆp, 1 − pˆ) turns out to be very
important in the context of zero-sum games and is given a name: a max-min (or maximin) strategy of
player A. One thing you might immediately notice is that this strategy is precisely the strategy we found
earlier which player A should play in equilibrium. This is by no means a coincidence and indeed we will
shortly show that in a zero-sum game an equilibrium strategy for player A is a max-min strategy. Note that
this property would further speed up the analysis we need to do to seek equilibria in the game: we could
immediately discount the strategy with p = 2/5 on the lower envelope, without checking it, simply by noting
it is not a maximal point on the lower envelope and hence doesn’t correspond to a max-min strategy and
thus is not an equilibrium strategy of the zero-sum game.
This maximum value of the lower envelope (and thus the max-min payoff) is unique (since it is nonsense for
there to be two different maximum heights), but it is possible for there to be multiple choices of max-min
strategies. For example, suppose we replace the payoff of 3 in the previous example at (a1, b2) with 2, as
shown in figure 40.
Figure 40: The example zero-sum game with one payoff changed.
The corresponding lower envelope diagram for this game is shown in figure 41.
57
Figure 41: The lower envelope diagram for the adjusted game.
The lower envelope now has maximal value 2, but this maximum is no longer attained at just one point,
but instead anywhere in the range of values ˆp ∈ [1/3, 4/5]. Setting ˆα = (ˆp, 1 − pˆ) for any of these values
of ˆp then gives a valid max-min strategy for player A. Clearly the blue line is the lowest of all three when
p ∈ (1/3, 4/5) meaning, in these cases, playing the corresponding pure strategy b2 is the best response for
player B. It turns out that even at the intersection points, when p = 1/3 or p = 4/5 that b2 is also the
equilibrium strategy for player B.
4.3 Max-min and Min-max Strategies
A max-min strategy, as seen in the last example, is a strategy that maximises the lower envelope of player A’s
expected payoffs. A min-max (or minimax) strategy is the name we give to the corresponding strategy for
player B: it minimises the upper envelope of player B’s expected payoffs. We formally define these strategies
now.
Definition 4.25. A max-min strategy ˆα ∈ AS of player A is a strategy such that
min
β∈BS
{g(ˆα, β)} = max
α∈AS

min
β∈BS
{g(α, β)}

,
assuming that these maxima and minima exist. This also defines the max-min payoff to player A.
Definition 4.26. A min-max strategy βˆ ∈ BS of player B is a strategy such that
max
α∈AS
n
g(α, βˆ)
o
= min
β∈BS

max
α∈AS
{g(α, β)}

.
This gives the min-max payoff to player B.
58
These strategies in strictly competitive (zero-sum) games give a guaranteed (albeit expected) payoff to
the player regardless of what the opponent plays. In a game with separate payoffs for both players, like
we have analysed throughout the first three chapters, player B may not always want to play a strategy
minimising player A’s payoffs since they care about maximising their own. In zero-sum games however these
are equivalent.
Let’s now remark on an important property of these strategies, that is, the fact that we don’t need to
minimise over all β ∈ BS when seeking player A’s max-min strategy (and similarly maximise over all α ∈ AS
when seeking player B’s min-max strategy), rather just over the opponent’s pure strategies. We have seen
this idea in practice in the example game where we graphed the lower envelope using just the opponent’s
pure strategies.
Proposition 4.27. In a zero-sum game, for α ∈ AS, then
min
β∈BS
{g(α, β)} = min
b∈BS
{g(α, b)} .
Similarly, for β ∈ BS, then
max
α∈AS
{g(α, β)} = max
a∈AS
{g(a, β)} .
Proof. The proof of these results almost identically follows the proof of proposition 3.20 so we omit it
here.
Let’s do an example.
Example: Find max-min and min-max strategies for players A and B respectively in the zero-sum game
given in normal form in figure 42.
Figure 42: An example zero-sum game.
Solution: We will do this without drawing the envelope diagrams to showcase an alternative way to find
59
these strategies. By definition, a max-min strategy for player A is a strategy ˆα such that
min
β∈BS
{g(ˆα, β)} = max
α∈AS

min
β∈BS
{g(α, β)}

,
which, via the last proposition 4.27, we can write as
min
b∈BS
{g( ˆα, b)} = max
α∈AS

min
b∈BS
{g(α, b)}

.
Writing α = (p, 1 − p), then against B’s pure strategies we have
g(α, b1) = p + 2(1 − p) = 2 − p,
g(α, b2) = 3p + (1 − p) = 1 + 2p.
Now maximising the minimum of these two quantities over p ∈ [0, 1] it is clear this value occurs when
2 − p = 1 + 2p, or when p = 1/3 and gives 5/3 as the max-min payoff to A. The max-min strategy for A is
thus ˆα = (1/3, 2/3).
For B, by definition, a min-max strategy βˆ is such that
max
α∈AS
n
g(α, βˆ)
o
= min
β∈BS

max
α∈AS
{g(α, β)}

.
which, using proposition 4.27, we can simplify as
min
a∈AS
n
g(a, βˆ)
o
= min
β∈BS

max
a∈AS
{g(a, β)}

.
Writing β = (q, 1 − q), we have
g(a1, β) = q + 3(1 − q) = 3 − 2q,
g(a2, β) = 2q + (1 − q) = 1 + q.
Minimising the maximum of these quantities over q ∈ [0, 1] occurs when 3 − 2q = 1 + q, or when q = 2/3
giving again 5/3 as the expected payoff to A (or −5/3 as the min-max payoff to B). The min-max strategy
for B is βˆ = (2/3, 1/3).
Remarks:
• Analysing the game to seek its equilibria using the methods we have already developed (exercise) we
find that the pair of max-min and min-max strategies found here correspond to the players mixed
equilibrium strategies. As alluded to earlier, this is not a coincidence.
• Notice in the last example that the max-min and min-max strategies both gave player A the same
expected payoff of 5/3. Again, we will see shortly that this is not a coincidence and this payoff value
is given a special name.
60
4.4 Relationship of Equilibria and Max-min/Min-max Strategies
In this section we will prove that a pair of max-min and min-max strategies giving equal payoff to player A
form an equilibrium in a zero-sum game. Before we prove this we make note of an inequality that we will
need during the proof. We claim that
max
α∈AS

min
β∈BS
{g(α, β)}

≤ min
β∈BS

max
α∈AS
{g(α, β)}

, (13)
which on first thought may seem far from trivial. However this inequality essentially says that
max-min payoff ≤ min-max payoff,
which is trivially true (otherwise we would have min-max strategies for B that could guarantee getting A
less than A could guarantee getting using a max-min strategy, which is nonsense).
Proposition 4.28. In a finite zero-sum game with αˆ ∈ AS, βˆ ∈ BS then (ˆα, βˆ) is an equilibrium if and only
if αˆ is a max-min strategy for A, βˆ is a min-max strategy for B and
max
α∈AS

min
β∈BS
{g(α, β)}

= min
β∈BS

max
α∈AS
{g(α, β)}

. (14)
Proof. (⇐): Let ˆα be max-min and βˆ be min-max and assume (14) holds. Then
g( ˆα, βˆ) ≥ min
β∈BS
{g(ˆα, β)}
= max
α∈AS

min
β∈BS
{g(α, β)}

,
= min
β∈BS

max
α∈AS
{g(α, β)}

, by (14),
= max
α∈AS
n
g(α, βˆ)
o
≥ g(ˆα, βˆ),
where we have used the facts that ˆα is max-min and βˆ is min-max. What we have deduced means that all
inequalities must be equalities. Hence we have
max
α∈AS
n
g(α, βˆ)
o
= g(ˆα, βˆ) = min
β∈BS
{g( ˆα, β)}, (15)
which means that
g(α, βˆ) ≤ g(ˆα, βˆ) ≤ g(ˆα, β),
for all α ∈ AS, β ∈ BS. But this is precisely the definition that ( ˆα, βˆ) is in equilibrium since the left
inequality means ˆα is a best response to βˆ and the right inequality that βˆ is a best response to ˆα.
(⇒): Suppose instead that (ˆα, βˆ) is an equilibrium. Then, as just discussed, this is equivalent to (15). So,
61
we have
g( ˆα, βˆ) = min
β∈BS
{g(ˆα, β)},
≤ max
α∈AS

min
β∈BS
{g(α, β)}

,
≤ min
β∈BS

max
α∈AS
{g(α, β)}

, using (13),
≤ max
α∈AS
n
g(α, βˆ)
o
= g(ˆα, βˆ),
so we also have equalities throughout, meaning that ˆα is a max-min strategy, βˆ is a min-max strategy
and (14) holds.
Let’s talk about what this proposition tells us. It tells us that pairs of max-min and min-max strategies
which give equal expected payoffs to player A are equilibria of the game, and vice-versa, so equilibria are
indeed pairs of max-min and min-max strategies giving equal expected payoffs. This is great but we are still
missing something crucial; whether these pairs of special strategies giving equal payoffs are always present
in a zero-sum game, i.e. we haven’t proved anything about their existence. Well the short answer is we
don’t need to, we have this already: we use Nash’s theorem, which says that in a finite game (which can
be zero-sum), that an equilibrium always exists. Hence using the last proposition 4.28, we know that these
pairs of max-min and min-max strategies always exist in a zero-sum game.
Nevertheless, we now take a moment to zip back into the past, before Nash’s theorem was proved, and
consider the famous minimax theorem of Von Neumann (1928). This theorem says precisely that a
pair of max-min and min-max strategies giving equal payoff to player A always exist in a zero-sum game,
thus giving us the existence of an equilibrium via proposition 4.28. Now we know this is just a consequence
of the stronger theorem proved by Nash, but nevertheless this theorem by Von Neumann was proved several
years before Nash’s theorem and hence advanced the theory on zero-sum games. Its classical importance
means it is something we should be aware of at the very least!
4.5 The Minimax Theorem of Von Neumann (1928)
Theorem 4.29 (Von Neumann (1928)). In a finite zero-sum game then
max
α∈AS

min
β∈BS
{g(α, β)}

= v = min
β∈BS

max
α∈AS
{g(α, β)}

,
where v is the unique max-min payoff to A (and cost to player B), called the value of the game.
Proof. Let the finite game have size n × m. First let’s consider the following two optimisation problems
related to the game:
Minimise v subject to g(ai
, β) ≤ v, β ∈ BS, i = 1, 2, · · · , n, (16)
and
Maximise u subject to g(α, bj ) ≥ u, α ∈ AS, j = 1, 2, · · · , m. (17)
62
The constraints g(ai
, β) ≤ v mean that, by playing strategy β, player B loses (or pays) at most v in every
row of the game. Similarly, the constraints g(α, bj ) ≥ u mean that, by playing strategy α, player A gets at
least u in every column of the game.
Suppose now that β and v have been found optimal in problem (16). That means that at least one of the
n inequalities g(ai
, β) ≤ v, i = 1, 2, · · · , n must hold as equality, since if all inequalities were strict then it
must be possible to continue to reduce the value of v further. That means that v fulfills
v = max
a∈AS
{g(a, β)} = max
α∈AS
{g(α, β)} ,
where we have used proposition 4.27 to obtain the second equality. Also note that an optimal choice of β in
problem (16) is precisely a min-max strategy by definition. Similarly, in problem (17), for an optimal pair
α, u we have
u = min
b∈BS
{g(α, b)} = min
β∈BS
{g(α, β)} ,
where α is a max-min strategy. These optimal values for u and v must exist and be unique (this is because
we are dealing with finite payoffs meaning u and v take possible values in non-empty compact sets).
Claim: u = v.
This then also means that ‘max-min = min-max’ and proves the theorem. So it remains to show that this
claim is true.
Proof of claim: We will prove the claim by induction on the value of n + m.
Base Case: Let n + m = 2. Then it is simple to check that we must have u = v in this case (exercise).
Consider now a game G of dimension n×m and let α, β, u and v be optimal solutions to (16) and (17). Note
that
u = min
b∈BS
{g(α, b)} ≤ g(α, β) ≤ max
a∈AS
{g(a, β)} = v. (18)
Now if all the inequalities in problems (16) and (17) hold as equalities, then
g(ai
, β) = v for all i,
and g(α, bj ) = u for all j,
so then we also have equalities throughout (18) and hence u = v. So, let’s assume that at least one of the
inequalities in g(ai
, β) ≤ v, i = 1, 2, · · · , n is strict (it could be the case that this is not true and rather
at least one of the inequalities in g(α, bj ) ≥ u, j = 1, 2, · · · , m is strict. The proof of this case follows in a
similar manner). Let it be the kth row where this inequality is strict. Then, letting β = (q1, q2, · · · , qm), we
have
Xm
j=1
g(ak, bj )qj < v. (19)
63
Now let G′ be the game G with the kth row (representing pure strategy ak for A) deleted. Let β
′
, v′ be the
optimal solution to (16) using game G′
instead of G and let α
′
, u′ be the optimal solution to (17) using game
G′
. Now it must be the case that
u
′ ≤ u, and v
′ ≤ v. (20)
This is because, by removing a row of the game G, i.e. removing a pure strategy for player A, the resulting
game G′
can only become less favourable than the game G for player A. Now, by our inductive hypothesis we have that u
′ = v
′
in G′
.
We claim now however, that v
′ = v. Suppose instead that v
′ < v. Let ε ∈ (0, 1] and consider the strategy
β
∗ = β(1 − ε) + εβ′
, which is a valid mixed strategy in BS because BS is a convex set and β
∗
is a convex
combination of strategies in BS. We will show that this strategy used in game G gives possible v
∗ values less
than v and hence is in contradiction with with minimality of the value v in game G. First note that
g(ai
, β∗
) = g(ai
, β(1 − ε) + εβ′
)
= (1 − ε)g(ai
, β) + εg(ai
, β′
)
≤ (1 − ε)v + εv′
= v − ε(v − v
′
) < v,
for i = 1, 2, · · · , k − 1, k + 1, · · · , n, since we assumed v
′ < v. Now, writing β
∗ = (q
∗
1
, q∗
2
, · · · , q∗
m) so that
q
∗
j = qj (1 − ε) + εq′
j
, and using strategy β
∗
in (19) shows that
Xm
j=1
g(ak, bj )q
∗
j =
Xm
j=1
g(ak, bj )

qj (1 − ε) + εq′
j

=
Xm
j=1
g(ak, bj )qj + ε
Xm
j=1
g(ak, bj )(q
′
j − qj ) < v,
provided we take ε sufficiently small. This indeed means that there are strategies β
∗ ∈ BS and values v
∗ < v
so that g(ai
, β∗
) ≤ v
∗
. This is in contradiction with the minimality of v in (16), meaning that it must be
false that v
′ < v and hence we must have v
′ = v. Finally, using this fact in (20) leads to
u
′ ≤ u ≤ v = v
′ = u
′
,
and so therefore u = v which was what we needed to show.
Remarks:
• This proof using induction comes from the text by Von Stengel (2021) where it originally came from
Loomis (1946). The original proof of the minimax theorem by Von Neumann was done geometrically
and involved considering a separating hyperplane between convex sets. We have decided to show
this inductive proof to avoid needing to delve into the technical geometric aspects required for Von
Neumann’s proof.
• We have now witnessed the unique properties of equilibria in zero-sum games: firstly that an equilibrium
strategy is the same as a max-min strategy (for player A and a min-max strategy for player B) and is
therefore independent of what the other player does, and secondly that the equilibrium payoff to the
players is unique, v, and called the value of the game (this is the payoff player A receives while player
B gets −v).
64
4.6 Finding Solutions in Small Zero-Sum Games
We have seen examples of how we might solve small games so far throughout the course. Importantly, when
the game is not zero-sum, it usually matters that we find all solutions (all equilibria) to the game, since, in
general, different equilibria give different payoffs to each player. However, as we have seen, when a game is
zero-sum, then it has a unique value, v, which is the same for any pair of max-min/min-max strategies.
Let’s first prove a proposition, then you’ll see where we are going with this argument.
Proposition 4.30. Consider two zero-sum games G and G′
, where G′
is obtained from G by deleting a
weakly dominated strategy of one of the players. Then any equilibrium of G′
is an equilibrium of G, and G
and G′ have the same value.
Proof. An equilibrium of G′ defines a mixed strategy pair in G. This is also an equilibrium of G if there is no
profitable deviation to a pure strategy in G. The only deviation possible which is not available in G′ would
be to the weakly dominated strategy, but then if that deviation was profitable then deviating to the strategy
which weakly dominated this would be profitable too. But this strategy is in G′ and hence deviating to it
cannot be profitable otherwise this would contradict the fact we had an equilibrium initially. Hence this
equilibrium must also be an equilibrium in G. By proposition 4.28 the payoff at equilibrium in a zero-sum
game is the value of the game, which is therefore the same in both games.
Remarks:
• There is an important consequence of this proposition. That if we are only interested in the value
of a zero-sum game (which is usually the case, since any equilibrium gives this payoff, so we usually
only care about finding a solution and the value when it comes to zero-sum games), then we can
delete weakly dominated strategies (and iterate this), to help us more easily find an equilibrium
and hence the value of the game. We may, of course, lose some of the possible max-min and min-max
strategies by doing this however.
• In the same manner, if we encounter any groups of payoff equivalent strategies in a zero-sum game,
we may also delete all but one of these strategies from each group and any equilibrium found in the
resulting game will also be an equilibrium in the original game with the same value.
Let’s see this concept in action in a game we would struggle to solve otherwise.
4.6.1 Raid on the high profile Military targets
Five high profile military targets are connected to each other as shown in figure 43.
65
Figure 43: The connections between the high profile military targets.
Army A plans to attack one of these five targets. Army B will chose to defend one of these targets, but due
to the excellent infrastructure connecting the targets, any target connected immediately (i.e. is one edge
away) to army B’s chosen target is also defended. These choices of each army occur simultaneously.
If A attacks a defended target they lose a point (think of the cost as a loss of forces as the defenders are
well equipped to destroy the invaders) and B gains a point (some value from destruction of the enemy). If
A attacks an undefended target, A gets a point (from the destruction of a key enemy military target) and
B loses a point (from the loss of the target).
Question: Determine a pair of optimal strategies for each army and deduce the value of this attack to army
A. As chief military advisor of army A should you proceed with the attack?
Solution: Let’s represent pure strategy ai as attack target i and bj as defend target j for i, j = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Then the normal form of the game is given in figure 44.
Figure 44: Normal form of the military targets game.
66
No strategies are dominated here, but since we are only concerned with finding a solution to the game we can
apply proposition 4.30 which says we can delete weakly dominated strategies to aid us with this. Deleting
a2 (since a1 weakly dominates it), a4 (since a5 weakly dominates it), b1 (since b2 weakly dominates it), b3
(since b2 weakly dominates it) and b5 (since b4 weakly dominates it), then we arrive at figure 45.
Figure 45: The military targets game after the deletion of several weakly dominated strategies.
To continue our analysis we make note of our recent remark. Strategies a1 and a3 are payoff equivalent.
This means we can delete one of them without changing the value of the game and any solution we find will
be a solution of the original game. So, let’s delete a3, giving figure 46.
Figure 46: Final simplified form of the military targets game.
From here, due to the symmetry of the game, we can guess that α = (1/2, 1/2) and β = (1/2, 1/2) are a pair
67
of strategies in equilibrium (exercise: check this!). This means that in the whole game
αˆ =

1
2
, 0, 0, 0,
1
2

,
and βˆ =

0,
1
2
, 0,
1
2
, 0

,
are a pair of optimal strategies (max-min and min-max) for army A and army B respectively. The value
of the game is g(ˆα, βˆ) = 0. This means that as army A’s military advisor you would have no incentive to
declare this attack: it isn’t costly to you, but isn’t worth anything to you.
68
Chapter 5: Cooperative Games
Many ‘games’ in the real world are cooperative where the players in the game can generally do better by
mutually agreeing on playing specific strategies, i.e. bargaining to agree on a collective good result for all.
For example, consider the situation between the buyer and seller of an asset, which could be as small as
haggling over the price of a pair of sunglasses with a street vendor to as large as international treaties over
weapons or foreign aid. These are game theoretic situations because it is useful to consider the position of
the other players, where players generally have something to gain by reaching an agreement.
In his undergraduate thesis, later published in 1950, John Nash proposed a set of ‘axioms’ to allow players to
reach a fair bargaining solution to a two-player cooperative game. Nash then showed these axioms always
gave rise to a unique solution, which is generally straightforward to calculate. Throughout this chapter we
will focus on two-player cooperative games in strategic form. We will state and discuss Nash’s bargaining
axioms and prove that they indeed give rise to a unique solution to the cooperative game in question. We
will then find this bargaining solution in an example cooperative game.
Players in cooperative game theory are assumed to be able to discuss the game and to agree in some way
on the strategies they will play and then to adhere to that agreement (there is no option of going back on
this agreement, think of all agreements as being binding). We will discuss which agreements are possible and
how players benefit from them, but we will not discuss how the players might enforce that these agreements
are upheld.
5.1 Bargaining Sets
Consider the example game in figure 47.
Figure 47: An example game being played cooperatively.
Player A’s strategy a2 dominates a1, and b2 dominates b1 for player B, so the game being played noncooperatively is dominance solvable with unique equilibrium given by (a2, b2) with a payoff of 1 to both
players. We have encountered games like this earlier in the course, consider the prisoner’s dilemma or
69
Cournot duopoly for example, where if players could play cooperatively then they could mutually do better
than they would by playing their equilibrium strategies. By agreeing to play the strategy pair (a1, b1) for
instance, they would receive payoffs of 2 and 3 respectively, better for both players than the equilibrium
payoffs of 1.
Suppose now we allow our players to do just this: to talk to each other about the game beforehand and
agree on a certain course of action that they intend to follow through. Then our first step in any cooperative
game should be to determine what our players can actually achieve, or stand to gain, by collaborating. To
do this, we identify a bargaining set of possible payoff pairs that the players can bargain over.
As usual, letting AS = {a1, a2, · · · , an} and BS = {b1, b2, · · · , bm}, then we first plot the points Pij , i =
1, · · · , n, j = 1, · · · , m represented by each of the pairs of pure strategy payoffs from the game in strategic
form, i.e.
Pij = (gA(ai
, bj ), gB(ai
, bj )).
For our example game from figure 47, we plot the points (a1, b1) = (2, 3), (a1, b2) = (0, 4), (a2, b1) = (3, 0)
and (a2, b2) = (1, 1). See figure 48 where these points are plotted with red crosses.
Figure 48: The construction of the bargaining set S, shaded in green, for our example game.
The convex hull (the set of convex combinations) of these payoff pairs is shaded in blue in figure 48. Playing
cooperatively, the players can agree on any point within the convex hull by use of a joint mixed strategy
that the players have decided to play. For example, the payoff pair (3/2, 2) as marked in figure 48, would be
70
the expected payoff each player would receive if they agreed to toss a fair coin, and, if it showed heads to
play strategies (a1, b1), or if it showed tails to play the strategies (a2, b2). This coin toss and agreed upon
retroactive action is part of the player’s binding agreement.
Question: Do you think this would be a good agreement for the players? Are there better ones?
As mentioned, in this way it is possible for the players to devise some joint mixed strategy such that any payoff pair in the convex hull can be selected. We can thus work with payoffs and think about which payoff pair
the players should agree upon, then later we can determine what strategy should be employed to achieve this.
Remark: Note that now, in a two-player cooperative game, the entire convex hull forms the possible payoff pairs available to the players. This is, in general, different to the payoff set we learned how to
determine when the game is being played non-cooperatively which didn’t contain the entire convex hull
since convex combinations between payoff pairs not in the same row or column were not possible. Playing
cooperatively however, by use of these joint mixed strategies, these convex combinations are now possible.
So is the bargaining set just the entirety of this convex hull? Not quite. Although all these payoff pairs are
possible to attain, not all of them are reasonable. We always assume that the players have the option to not
agree in advance. For example, player A would not agree that both players chose the strategy pair (a1, b2)
with certainty, as this would give player A a 0 payoff, something they could guarantee doing better than if
playing non-cooperatively!
Indeed, without any agreement with player B, player A can always just use their max-min strategy using
their own payoffs (which here is to play strategy a2) guaranteeing them a payoff of at least 1, completely
irrespective of whatever player B does. Likewise, player B can use their max-min strategy using their
own payoffs (which is to play b2) to guarantee themselves a payoff of at least 1, irrespective of what player
A does. Thus, it only makes sense for the players to bargain over payoff pairs that are at least as good as
what they could obtain by simply playing their max-min strategies on their own payoffs. Now we can define
the bargaining set.
Definition 5.31. The bargaining set (sometimes called the negotiation set), S, resulting from a twoplayer game in strategic form is the convex hull of all payoff pairs, with the added constraint that for all
(x, y) ∈ S, then
x ≥ tA,
y ≥ tB,
where tA is the max-min payoff of player A, i.e.
tA = max
α∈AS

min
β∈BS
{gA(α, β)}

,
known as A’s security level (or threat level). Similarly, tB is the max-min payoff of player B, i.e.
tB = max
β∈BS

min
α∈AS
{gB(α, β)}

,
known as B’s security level (or threat level). The point (tA, tB) is called the threat point.
71
Remark: In the construction of this bargaining set, S, from a cooperative game, the threat point (tA, tB)
need not itself be an element of S (this is a rare occurrence but possible: see problem sheet 5 for an example
where this is the case). For this reason, whenever we describe a bargaining set S, we also state the associated
threat point (tA, tB) with it, since this point turns out to be crucial in the bargaining solution we will find.
In our example, figure 48, the threat point is marked at (1, 1) (as these are the max-min payoffs for each
player) and the resulting bargaining set, S, is shaded in green. Note there is a final piece of information
displayed on figure 48 which is the purple shading on the ‘top-rightmost’ border of the bargaining set. We
will explain what this shading is in the next section after we see the bargaining axioms, but you might
already be able to see why this region of the bargaining set is important (if not take a think about why now)!
5.2 Bargaining Axioms
Given a two-player cooperative game, we can now determine a bargaining set for the players to negotiate
over. To attempt to obtain a ‘solution’ for such situations, we now present a list of axioms that any solution
to our cooperative game should abide. We will show later that these axioms lead to a unique bargaining
solution.
Definition 5.32 (Axioms for bargaining solution). For a bargaining set S with threat point (tA, tB), a
Nash bargaining solution N(S) is a pair (X, Y ) such that:
(a). (X, Y ) ∈ S;
(b). The solution (X, Y ) is pareto-optimal; i.e. for all (x, y) ∈ S, if x ≥ X and y ≥ Y , then (x, y) =
(X, Y );
(c). The solution is invariant under payoff scaling, meaning, if a, c > 0 and b, d ∈ R and we define S
′
to be the bargaining set
S
′ = {(ax + b, cy + d) : (x, y) ∈ S},
with threat point (atA + b, ctB + d), then N(S
′
) = (aX + b, cY + d);
(d). The solution is symmetry preserving, i.e. if tA = tB and (x, y) ∈ S implies (y, x) ∈ S then we must
have X = Y ;
(e). The solution is independent of irrelevant alternatives. This means if S, T are bargaining sets
with the same threat point and S ⊂ T, then either N(T) ∈/ S or N(T) = N(S).
Let’s discuss a couple of these axioms to understand them better. Pareto-optimality means that it should
not be possible to improve the solution for one player without harming the other. This means that the Nash
bargaining solution is always found on the so-called pareto-optimal frontier, which graphically looks
like the upper-right boarder of the bargaining set. The pareto-optimal frontier is shaded in purple back in
figure 48 for our example game. Schematics of typical cases are given in figures 49 and 50, again shaded in
purple.
72
Figure 49: A typical looking bargaining set with its paretooptimal frontier shaded purple.
Figure 50: Another typical looking bargaining set with its
pareto-optimal frontier shaded purple.
Remark: Note here that we have defined the bargaining set as the whole of the convex hull, with the
added constraint that points must lie anywhere above and to the right of the threat point (including directly
above or directly to the right). However, be aware that in some texts the bargaining set is defined as the
pareto-optimal frontier of our bargaining set, i.e. the purple shaded regions of the green sets in the figures
we have drawn so far.
Independence of irrelevant alternatives means that if our bargaining set S is extended to a new set T without
changing the threat point, then either T has a solution N(T) which is a new point in T and not in S, or it
has the same solution as S, N(S). In other words, new alternatives can’t cause our solution to change to
something else that we could have agreed upon before. Figure 51 shows a schematic of a bargaining set S
shaded in green and its solution labelled N(S). Set S is then extended to set T to include the extra region
shaded in red. For set T, N(T) could be a possible solution, but P could not be, since it is still within set
S and not equal to N(S).
Figure 51: A schematic to illustrate the independence of irrelevant alternatives.
73
Remark: This axiom is generally considered to be the most contentious. The other axioms are properties
that are widely accepted and in many people’s opinion it would be strange should a solution not fulfil them.
The validity of the independence of irrelevant alternatives is sometimes questioned. In this course we will
assume it holds.
5.3 The Nash Bargaining Solution
We now prove that the proposed bargaining axioms give rise to a unique solution of the cooperative game.
Theorem 5.33. Under the Nash bargaining axioms (a) - (e), every bargaining set S that contains a point
(x, y) with x > tA, y > tB has a unique solution N(S) = (X, Y ), which is obtained as the unique point
(x, y) ∈ S that maximises the Nash product, given by
(x − tA)(y − tB).
Proof. Let us begin with a bargaining set S containing at least one point (x, y) where x > tA and y > tB.
Figure 52 gives a picture which we will follow to help us visualise the proof.
Figure 52: Our bargaining set S. Figure 53: The translated set S
′
.
Now consider the set S
′ = {(x−tA, y −tB) : (x, y) ∈ S}, shown in figure 53, which simply translates set S so
that the threat point is at the origin. In set S
′
, maximising the Nash product then amounts to maximising
xy. Let (X, Y ) be a payoff pair where this maximisation occurs. Note that XY > 0. Figure 54 shows part
of the hyperbola xy = c for the maximal value c such that the hyperbola still intersects S
′
.
74
Figure 54: Set S
′ and the hyperbola xy = c. Figure 55: Set S
′′ and the hyperbola xy = 1.
Now we re-scale the payoffs so that (X, Y ) = (1, 1). To do this we replace set S
′ with set S
′′ given by
S
′′ =
n x
X
,
y
Y

: (x, y) ∈ S
′
o
,
which is shown in figure 55. Note now that this ‘maximal’ hyperbola is rescaled to xy = 1. Now consider
the set T given by
T = {(x, y) : x ≥ 0, y ≥ 0, x + y ≤ 2},
which we sketch along with set S
′′ in figure 56.
Figure 56: Set S
′′ and set T.
Figure 57: Some points lie to the right of the hyperbola.
For the bargaining set T, the solution is N(T) = (1, 1), because T is a symmetric set and (1, 1) is the
only symmetric point on the pareto-frontier of T. Now we claim that S
′′ ⊆ T (which might look obvious
from figure 56, but we prove more formally now). Suppose this were not the case, i.e. there was a point
(x, y) ∈ S
′′, but (x, y) ∈/ T. Well x ≥ 0 and y ≥ 0, so then it must be true that x + y > 2. Then, as shown
in figure 57, even if the Nash product xy is not greater than 1, then the Nash product x
∗y
∗ of some suitable
convex combination of (1, 1) and (x, y), namely
(x
∗
, y∗
) = (1 − ε)(1, 1) + ε(x, y), (21)
75
for some small ε > 0, is larger than 1. This must be true since the line segment connecting (1, 1) and (x, y)
must intersect the hyperbola xy = 1 (otherwise the point (x, y) would not lie to the right of the boundary
x + y = 2 of T) and thus there are points (x
∗
, y∗
) on this line to the right hand side of the hyperbola where
x
∗y
∗ > 1. But (x
∗
, y∗
) ∈ S
′′ since S
′′ is a convex set: i.e. if (1, 1) and (x, y) are in S
′′, then so is (x
∗
, y∗
),
a convex combination of these points. But this is a contradiction, since x
∗y
∗ > 1 but S
′′ was created such
that the maximal Nash product of any point in S
′′ was 1 (at (1, 1)). Hence S
′′ ⊆ T, which means that
N(T) = (1, 1) ∈ S
′′, so by the independence of irrelevant alternatives, we must have N(S
′′) = N(T).
We are almost done. This indeed means that our bargaining axioms have given a solution to S which comes
from maximising the Nash product, but it remains to show that this solution is unique.
Uniqueness follows in precisely the same way that we just argued the point (x, y) caused there to be points
in S
′′ on the right hand side of the hyperbola. If there is another point (x, 1/x) ∈ S
′′ on the hyperbola with
x ̸= 1 then, since S
′′ is a convex set, the line segment that connects (1, 1) and (x, 1/x) is also all part of S
′′
,
but these interior points have a larger Nash product (as they lie to the right of the hyperbola). Hence our
bargaining solution is also unique.
Remarks:
• One can show that (21) leads to x
∗y
∗ > 1 for some ε algebraically should the geometric argument we
have used in the proof not satisfy them. A similar algebraic argument can also be used to show the
uniqueness property.
• We make the assumption that S has a point (x, y) with x > tA and y > tB otherwise all payoffs x
of player A or y of player B (or both) must be such that x = tA or y = tB. The Nash product will
then always be zero so it has no unique maximum (unless S is just the point (tA, tB)) and thus the
theorem would not hold. If this is the case however, it is trivial to determine (X, Y ) = N(S) since the
pareto-optimal frontier will just consist of a single point, which is then precisely the Nash bargaining
solution.
Example: Let’s find the Nash bargaining solution for the example in figure 47 from the start of the chapter.
The bargaining set S along with the threat point and pareto-optimal frontier is again shown here in figure 58.
76
Figure 58: The bargaining set, threat point and pareto-optimal frontier for our example cooperative
game.
The pareto-optimal frontier consists of two line segments, labelled as segment ○1 and segment ○2 in figure 58. We need to maximise the Nash product over both of these to determine its maximum over the whole
pareto-frontier.
Line segment ○1 has equation x + 2y = 8, using this in the Nash product gives
(x − tA)(y − tB) = (x − 1)(y − 1)
= (x − 1)(3 −
1
2
x)
= −
1
2
x
2 +
7
2
x − 3,
which, by completing the square or use of calculus, takes its maximum value when x = 7/2. Now we need
to take care. Notice on our line segment ○1 we have 1 ≤ x ≤ 2, but 7/2 lies outside of this range, so the
maximum of the Nash product on line segment ○1 must occur instead at an end point, which is clearly at
the end point when x = 2, since this lies closer to 7/2 than the other end point. This then gives maximised
Nash product (2 − 1)(3 − 1) = 2.
Now we need to check line segment ○2 where 3x + y = 9. The Nash product becomes −3x
2 + 11x − 8, which
takes its maximum when x = 11/6, which again lies off our line segment where 2 ≤ x ≤ 8/3. Thus the
maximal Nash product must occur at the end point when x = 2.
Having now checked for the maximal value of the Nash product everywhere on our pareto-optimal frontier
we can conclude when x = 2 and y = 3 we have our Nash bargaining solution. Going back to the game in
strategic form in figure 47, we see this pair of payoffs for our players corresponds to them agreeing to play
77
the pure strategy pair (a1, b1).
Remark: Note that it will not always be the case that the solution gives a pair of pure strategies. Often a
joint mixed strategy for the players is required. See problem sheet 5 for examples of this.
78
Chapter 6: Congestion Games
6.1 An Introduction to Congestion Games
Congestion games (or routing games) arise from the context of a shared resource, such as roads or connections to a server, needing to be used by several people where the use of the resource becomes more costly
as more people continue to use it. Multiple users in a congestion game will be trying to minimise this cost
whilst using the resource.
Throughout this chapter we will generally consider a congestion game in the context of traffic on roads where
the users of the roads (our players) will be trying to get from one location to another in as cost effective a
way as possible. Figure 59 shows an example of a congestion network, which takes the form of a directed
graph (or digraph). This congestion network has two nodes, A and B, and two directed edges that
connect A to B.
Figure 59: A congestion network of two nodes and two edges.
Suppose we now have several users of this network who all want to travel from node A to node B and
they can choose any route from A to B they wish. As shown in figure 59, each edge of the network has an
associated cost function, c(x), which describes how costly it is for each user to use that edge when there
is a flow (or load) of x users using the edge. This cost could represent the travel time, or some monetary
cost from tolls, or a combination of these things. This function is the same for all users of the network.
Suppose the network in figure 59 is now used by three users, each of whom can choose to travel from A to
B using the top edge, or the bottom edge. Let’s look at each possibility:
• If all three use the top edge, then each pays a cost of c(x) = 3. Notice that the bottom edge is currently
‘worth’ c(x) = 1 to each user, i.e if they were to switch to using that edge, they would only pay a cost
of 1 for the travel. For this reason (as we will define formally shortly), we say that this configuration
is not in equilibrium, because at least one user can improve their cost by switching to the bottom
edge (changing their current strategy). You can hopefully see where we are going with this!
• Secondly, two users could choose the top edge, with one user on the bottom edge. The users on the
79
top edge would pay a cost of c(x) = 3 each, but the user on the bottom edge pays just c(x) = 1 for
their travel. Although the bottom user is currently happily paying c(x) = 1 for their journey, each top
user is incentivised to switch to the bottom edge where they would then only pay c(x) = 2, less than
what they currently pay.
• What about two users on the bottom edge and one on the top edge. Well the user on the top edge pays
c(x) = 3, while the two users on the bottom edge each pay c(x) = 2. However, notice now the crucial
difference to the first two cases: in this case, every user is content in the sense that no individual user
can change their path to improve their cost. Indeed, if either user on the bottom path changes to the
top path then instead they increase their cost, and if the user on the top edge changes to the bottom
edge their cost remains the same (at c(x) = 3). There is no strict incentive for any individual to
change their path and as so the situation is in equilibrium (again we will define this formally in the
context of congestion games soon).
• Lastly, if all three users are on the bottom edge, all pay c(x) = 3, but again no individual has incentive
to deviate as the top edge doesn’t offer anything less, so this is again an equilibrium.
So our example network has two equilibria when there are three users.
Exercise: How many equilibria are there (and what are they) if our network has N > 3 many users?
The underlying behaviour of the users that we have been considering is known as ‘selfish routing’: that
is, every user of the network tries to find the route that is the least costly for them. An equilibrium is then
obtained when every user is in a situation where they cannot find a better route (a route costing less) for
themselves by changing just their own route.
An interesting question we will investigate throughout this chapter is the following: is selfish routing ever
socially optimal, measured by the average cost per user of the network. In our example, if we have either
one or two users on the top edge then we are in a social optimum with the average cost per user at 7/3.
Notice that the first of these cases is also an equilibrium. The second equilibrium we found, with all three
users on the lower path, however leads to an average cost per user of 3, not a social optimum. So we see
that selfish routing can lead to situations where the average user of the network is worse off than they would
be in a social optimal flow.
6.2 Atomic and Splittable Flow
We make a remark here on the differences between two major types of flow considered in a congestion game.
In the last example we considered three individual users and thought about their choices through the network. This is a type of atomic flow (think of it informally as the discrete case) through a congestion game,
where we think of users being atoms that cannot be split up any further. This meant that in the last example
we were not considering cases such as 5/2 users taking the top edge with 1/2 user taking the bottom edge,
since this makes no meaningful sense if we are considering individual users.
Alternatively, we could consider the congestion networks with a continuum of users flowing throughout them,
known as splittable flow. In this case we think of a flow unit as just some ‘mass’ of users of which any
80
parts can be routed along different paths, rather than as just one individual user. Using our example network
from figure 59 and considering a splittable flow model with 3 units of flow (or we might say ‘of mass 3’)
we can try to find the equilibria and compare their differences/similarities with those found using atomic flow.
Indeed, by doing this, one will find now that only the case where all 3 units flow through the bottom edge
is in equilibrium. Even if 2.999 units flow through the bottom edge with 0.001 units through the top edge,
it is still beneficial for any one user of the 0.001 fraction of users to deviate to using the bottom edge (think
of every individual user as being negligibly small in this continuum model of splittable flow).
Remarks:
• As it turns out, splittable flow tends to lead to simpler calculations because the minor variations in
equilibria (that we find with discrete users in the network) don’t occur. In our example we will just
find the equilibria with 3 users on the bottom edge for instance.
• Throughout the rest of this chapter, unless stated otherwise, we will consider the atomic flow model
with individual users on our congestion network to be our default case! We will explicitly state when
we will consider splittable flow.
6.3 The Pigou Network
Let’s now look at a very similar example to that we started with known as the Pigou network (in fact the
example we started with is also a Pigou network), named after the economist Arthur Pigou, see figure 60.
Figure 60: A Pigou network.
Assume that there are 100 users who want to travel through this network from A to B. In this case we find two
equilibria: one where all 100 users are using the bottom edge, and another with 99 users on the bottom edge
and one user on the top edge. In each of these cases let’s find the average cost per user. Clearly, in the first
case the average cost per user is 100, and in the second case the average cost is (99×99+1×100)/100 = 99.01.
81
Let’s now take an alternative approach and consider what the average cost per user would be in a social
optimum, i.e a distribution of users which gives the lowest possible average cost per user (rather than
selfish routing). To determine this, let’s suppose that y users take the top edge, so 100 − y users take the
bottom edge. Then the average cost per user can be calculated as
Average Cost = 100y + (100 − y)
2
100
=
1
100
y
2 − y + 100.
This is a quadratic function of y, whose minimum value is found when y = 50 (note that if this was noninteger, then in the case of atomic flow, we would need to check the integers either side to find which integer
value gave the minimum. This is unnecessary in splittable flow). When y = 50 then we get an average cost
per user equal to 75, considerably lower than those average costs found in equilibrium cases. Notice critically
however that although the average cost per user here is significantly better, the 50 − 50 split found is not an
equilibrium. The users on the path of cost c(x) = 100 are incentivised to switch and lower their individual
costs, but in turn this will raise the average cost per user.
This has much real world context. The social optimum found here would need to be enforced somehow
should we want this solution to pertain, for example, we could enforce a congestion charge or extra tolls
that may maintain this. The Pigou network shows that selfish routing can easily lead to situations where
the average user is worse off than in a social optimum.
6.4 The Braess Paradox
We now investigate a famous congestion game that illustrates a strange effect of users acting according to
selfish routing. Figures 61 and 62 show two congestion networks, where in the second network an additional
edge of zero cost has been constructed between nodes B and C. In both networks we assume that there are
100 users who want to travel from node A to node D.
Figure 61: The original congestion network. Figure 62: The modified network with an additional shortcut.
Let’s start by finding the equilibria and the social optimal flow for the network in figure 61, without the
extra edge. Suppose y users take the bottom path (from A → B → D), so then 100 − y users are taking the
upper path (from A → C → D).
82
The cost per user of the bottom path is then 100 + y while the cost of the top path is 200 − y for each user.
We have an equilibrium when these quantities are equal, or 1 apart, which here only occurs when y = 50,
meaning that we have an equal split of 50 users on each route. Note that in this congestion network, this is
also equal to the socially optimal flow, giving an average cost per user of 150.
Now let’s consider the second network in figure 62 with the new shortcut opened up. As before, suppose y
users take route AB, with z users (z ≤ y) taking the new route BC, so then y − z users take route BD. As
before 100 − y users take route AC, but then 100 − y + z users will take route CD. There are now three
possible paths through the network from A to D. They are labelled and drawn in figure 63.
Figure 63: The three possible paths through the network from A to D.
The cost per user of each path is then:
cost1 = 100 + (100 − y + z) = 200 − y + z,
cost2 = y + 100,
cost3 = y + 0 + (100 − y + z) = 100 + z.
This time we have an equilibrium when either y = z = 100, y = 100 and z = 99, y = z = 99 or finally
y = 99 and z = 98 (these are all the cases where the three quantities are within 1 of each other, meaning no
individual has an incentive to deviate to a different path).
Note that the average cost per user in any of these equilibria becomes equal to, or just below 200 (feel free
to calculate the precise values in each case if you want). Now recall, in the first congestion game in figure 61,
before the extra capacity shortcut was opened, this average cost in equilibrium was 150. This has increased
significantly by adding in the extra zero cost route!
83
This phenomenon is known as the Braess paradox (1968), which shows that adding extra capacity to
a network can actually make congestion worse in equilibrium rather than better (as one might normally
expect). Similarly, by closing down a path in some networks, congestion can be reduced. Anecdotally this
paradox has been seen in the real world where, in 2002 in Seoul (Korea), a motorway was dismantled and
replaced with a park. Subsequently traffic in the area improved (of course this may be due to many other
different factors, but is interesting nonetheless)!
6.5 Components of a Congestion Game
Let’s now formalise the concept of a congestion game and the notion of equilibrium that we have been using
in this chapter so far. First we define a congestion network.
Definition 6.34. A congestion network has the following components:
• A finite set of nodes;
• A finite collection of directed edges where each edge, e, is an ordered pair, written AB, from some
node A to some node B. Note that multiple edges from one node to another node are allowed (e.g the
two edges from A to B in the Pigou network);
• Each edge, e, has an associated cost function, ce(x), giving a value when there are x users on edge e
which corresponds to the cost each user pays for using edge e. Each cost function should be weakly
increasing, meaning that x ≤ y ⇒ ce(x) ≤ ce(y).
These then form a digraph (a directed graph) with cost functions for each edge.
Now we define a congestion game.
Definition 6.35. To form a congestion game we need the following components:
• A congestion network;
• A number N of users of the network (or a total ‘mass’ of users if using a splittable flow model). Each
user i = 1, 2, · · · , N has an origin node Oi and destination node Di which can be different or the same
for all users.
• A strategy of user i is a path Pi (a sequence of distinct edges) from Oi to Di
. Given a strategy Pi
for each user i, the flow (or load) through an edge, e, of the congestion network is defined as
fe = |{i : e ∈ Pi}|,
i.e. the flow corresponds to the number of users on edge e.
• The cost to user i for their strategy choice Pi
is then
Costi(Pi) = X
e∈Pi
ce(fe).
A congestion network with the above components forms a congestion game where each user tries to minimise
their cost.
84
Now let us define the notion of a best response in this context.
Definition 6.36. We say Pi
is a best response for user i against the strategies Pj , j = 1, 2, · · · , i − 1, i +
1, · · · , N for the other users if
X
e∈Pi
ce(fe) ≤
X
e∈Pi∩Qi
ce(fe) + X
e∈Qi/Pi
ce(fe + 1), (22)
holds for every possible alternative strategy Qi of user i.
Remarks:
• As usual, the concept of best response only concerns unilateral deviations (deviations of only one user).
• The inequality (22) simply says that
Costi(Pi) ≤ Costi(Qi),
holds for all different possible strategies Qi
, i.e that Pi gives the lowest possible cost to user i. To
see why this is the case, consider what happens when user i changes their strategy Pi to strategy Qi
.
These are just two different paths through the network. Thus, any edges in common between the two
paths, i.e. any edges in the set Pi ∩ Qi will have their flow unchanged when player i changes from
strategy Pi to strategy Qi
. Hence player i pays a cost of
X
e∈Pi∩Qi
ce(fe),
for all of these edges. However, for the remaining edges in the new path Qi that were not part of the
old path Pi then player i has now joined the flow that was previously on them, increasing it by 1 and
hence paying a cost of
X
e∈Qi/Pi
ce(fe + 1),
for these edges.
Finally, we can now define the concept of equilibrium in a congestion game.
Definition 6.37. In a congestion game with N users, the strategies P1, P2, · · · , PN of all N users define an
equilibrium if each strategy is a best response to the other strategies, i.e. if (22) holds for all i = 1, 2, . . . , N.
6.6 Existence of an Equilibrium in a Congestion Game
We will now prove that a congestion game always has an equilibrium. We will prove this for the case of
atomic flow which has been the main focus of this chapter. The result also holds for splittable flow and you
are encouraged to try to prove this result on problem set 6.
Theorem 6.38. Every congestion game has at least one equilibrium.
Proof. Let the N strategies of all users of the network be P1 (for user 1), P2 (for user 2), · · · , PN (for user
N). These then define a flow, fe, on each edge, e, of the network. This is the number of users i with e ∈ Pi
.
85
Let’s then denote this collection of flows on each edge by f; the flow induced across the whole network by
strategies P1, · · · , PN . Now we define the following function of this ‘global’ flow f:
ϕ(f) = X
e
(ce(1) + ce(2) + · · · + ce(fe)). (23)
We will understand more about what this function is doing later in the proof! Now suppose user i changes
from strategy Pi to strategy Qi
. Let’s call the resulting new global flow f
∗
.
Claim:
ϕ(f
∗
) − ϕ(f) = X
e∈Qi
ce(f
∗
e
) −
X
e∈Pi
ce(fe), (24)
where f
∗
e
refers to the values of fe when i plays Qi
instead of Pi
.
Proof of Claim: First note that the right-hand-side of (24) is precisely the difference in cost to user i
between their strategies Qi and Pi
. Now the first term on the right-hand-side of (24) can be written as
X
e∈Qi
ce(f
∗
e
) = X
e∈Pi∩Qi
ce(fe) + X
e∈Qi/Pi
ce(fe + 1).
Player i’s cost for the original flow, f, (i.e. the second term on the right-hand-side of (24)) can be expressed
similarly as:
X
e∈Pi
ce(fe) = X
e∈Pi∩Qi
ce(fe) + X
e∈Pi/Qi
ce(fe).
This means we can rewrite the right-hand-side of (24) as:
X
e∈Qi
ce(f
∗
e
) −
X
e∈Pi
ce(fe) = X
e∈Qi/Pi
ce(fe + 1) −
X
e∈Pi/Qi
ce(fe).
Now by the definition of ϕ(f) in (23), we can see that this quantity above indeed equals the left-hand-side
of (24). To see this, consider what happens when user i changes their strategy from Pi to Qi
. The flow on
any new edge e ∈ Qi/Pi
increases from fe to fe + 1, hence adding the term ce(fe + 1) to the sum in the
definition of ϕ(f) in (23). Similarly, for any edge e ∈ Pi/Qi
, the flow f
∗
e
is reduced from fe down to fe − 1,
so the term ce(fe) has to be subtracted from the sum in the definition of ϕ(f). Hence the claim is proved
and (24) holds.
Now (24) says that the change in cost to any user i when they change their strategy (from Pi to Qi),
and hence the flow, is the same as the change in the function ϕ(f). So now consider a flow that achieves
the minimum value of ϕ(f) for all possible flows f that result from all possible strategy combinations
P1, P2, · · · , PN of all users. There are finitely many such strategy combinations and thus flows, so this
minimum value exists. At this minimum, no change in flow can then reduce ϕ(f) any further, and hence no
individual user can reduce their cost. Thus, by definition, the players’ strategies at such a minimum of
ϕ(f) define an equilibrium.
86
Remarks:
• ϕ(f) = P
e
(ce(1) + ce(2) + · · · + ce(fe)) is called a potential function. It has the remarkable property (as used in the proof) that any change of strategy by a single user incurs a cost change for that
user which equals precisely the change in value of ϕ. This single function ϕ achieves this property for
all the users simultaneously!
• A game for which such a potential function can be introduced is called a potential game, which, by
the previous proof, has an equilibrium which can be found as the minimum of the potential function.
• To prove the theorem for splittable flow we need to slightly modify the potential function so it becomes
an integral rather than a sum. The rest of the proof follows similarly.
6.7 The Price of Anarchy
We now return to one of our earlier questions about selfish routing and the social optimum. We give a
definition of the price of anarchy (POA) and provide some bounds on its maximal value.
Definition 6.39. For a given congestion game, the price of anarchy (POA) is defined as
POA = Worst average cost per user in any equilibrium
Average cost per user in social optimum .
The use of the word ‘anarchy’ in this definition refers to the idea of the selfishness of the users when each
user cares only about minimising their own cost.
Example: In the Pigou network with 100 users from section 6.3, the price of anarchy is 100/75 = 4/3.
There have been some proven bounds on the price of anarchy. We mention two bounds here for the case
where all cost functions in the congestion game are affine, that is, functions of the form c(x) = ax + b for
non-negative values of a and b.
Proposition 6.40. For non-splittable, or atomic flow, the price of anarchy in any congestion game with
affine cost functions is at most 5
2
.
Proof. Problem set 6.
Proposition 6.41. For splittable flow the price of anarchy in any congestion game with affine cost functions
is at most 4
3
.
Proof. Problem set 6.
6.8 Example Game: Getting lunch at Imperial
Let’s look at an example game to end this chapter. It’s lunchtime on the South Kensington campus at
Imperial College and 10 mathematics students need to get some lunch, see the congestion game in figure 64.
87
Figure 64: The possible options to get food.
Our 10 students all need to travel from node A (no food) to node C (food). They value the time it takes
them to obtain their lunch (the cost of travelling from A to C) and wish to minimise this cost, shown for
each edge in the network in figure 64 where 0 ≤ z ≤ y.
Question:
a). Find all equilibria of this congestion game and their resulting average cost per user.
b). For the same network, find the equilibrium when x, y and z can be fractional quantities for a total
flow of 10 units from A to C (i.e. find the equilibrium when the flow is splittable).
c). Determine the social optimum flow of this congestion game and hence the price of anarchy for the
game under both atomic and splittable flow models.
Solution:
a). An equilibrium can be found by starting with some flow and then changing users who can improve
their cost. A natural starting point might be an equal split between the library cafe and the JCR, i.e.
setting x = y = 5. Now z of the y users who arrive at node B will use the lower of the two edges
starting at B, where the only possibilities are z = 2 or z = 3 because for z ≤ 1 an extra user would
have a lower cost 1 or 2 rather than 3, and for z ≥ 4 the top edge with constant cost 3 would be better.
If x = y = 5 and z = 2 then the x + z = 7 users would incur a cost of 7 and the remaining y − z = 3
users a cost of 8, and neither could improve, so this is an equilibrium with average cost 7.3.
If x = y = 5 and z = 3 then the x users would incur a cost of 7 and all y users a cost of 8, and again
neither could improve, so this is an equilibrium with average cost 7.5.
88
If x = 6, y = 4 and z = 2, then the x users have a cost of 8 and the z users a cost of 6, but increasing
y and z by 1 would raise the cost to 8. Hence, none of the x users have an incentive to deviate.
Similarly, the route of y − z = 2 users via the constant cost edge has cost 7 and again does not offer an improvement for any of the x users. The resulting expected cost is (6×8+2×6+2×7)/10 = 7.4.
If x = 6, y = 4 and z = 3, then this is another equilibrium with y = 4 users on the top route with cost
7 and x = 6 on the bottom edge with cost 8 and expected cost 7.6.
For x ≥ 7 the bottom edge has cost at least 9 but the top route at most cost 6 which would be increased
to 7 with another user, and one of the x users would change. Similarly, x ≤ 4 means a cost of at most
6 on the bottom edge and at least y + z ≥ 6 + 2 = 8 on the top route, with an incentive for any one of
the y users to move to the bottom edge. So these are not part of an equilibrium.
b). With splittable flow, the edge with z users will be filled to z = 3 (if y ≥ 3) because otherwise any
fraction of users of the edge BC with constant cost 3 could improve their cost by switching, with a
slight increase of z. So the top route always has a cost y + 3 and the bottom edge costs x + 2 which
have to be equal in a flow equilibrium. Because x + y = 10, this means x = 5.5, y = 4.5 and z = 3.
The resulting cost is 7.5 for all users.
c). We can write down
costtop = y + 3,
costmiddle = y + z,
costbottom = x + 2 = 12 − y,
where we have used x + y = 10 in the last equation. This means that the average cost per user on the
network is given by
=
1
10
[(y − z)(y + 3) + z(y + z) + (10 − y)(12 − y)]
=
(y −
19
4
)
2
5
+
(z −
3
2
)
2
10
+
581
80
.
Clearly for splittable flow this quantity is minimised when y =
19
4
, z =
3
2
and x =
21
4
, giving an
average cost per user of 7.2625 or 581
80 . For atomic flow we need to try integer values close to these and
we find that x = 5, y = 5 and z = 1 or 2, results in a minimal average cost per user of 7.3. Hence the
price of anarchy for each flow type is:
POAsplittable =
7.5
7.2625
≈ 1.03,
POAatomic =
7.6
7.3
≈ 1.04.
89
Chapter 7: Combinatorial Games
In this chapter we focus on combinatorial games. These are two-player, perfect information, sequential
(players alternate moves) games like Chess, Draughts (Checkers), Nim and Go. There are no chance moves
like rolling dice or shuffling cards and play ends with either a win for one player and a loss for the other,
or a draw. Assuming that our players are playing the game optimally, we will try to answer the question of
which player will win given a specific game position.
Combinatorial games have a typically finite number of positions with well defined rules on how to arrive at
the next position. They come in two distinct types:
• Impartial Games: where the available moves in a given game position do not depend on whose turn
it is to move, e.g Nim, or
• Partizan Games: where the available moves in a given game position depend on whose turn it is to
move, e.g Chess (players typically have different coloured pieces in games like this and can only act
using their coloured pieces).
In this chapter we focus on developing a detailed theory for impartial games, where the game of Nim turns
out to play a central role in the theory.
7.0.1 The Ending Condition
A further feature of these games is the existence of what is known as the ending condition: meaning that
the rules are designed such that play of the game will come to an end due to some player being eventually
unable to move. The games cannot continue indefinitely. This is an important property of these games and
we will refer to it regularly.
7.0.2 The Normal Play Convention
Throughout this chapter we will consider combinatorial games played under the normal play convention:
this means that the player who is unable to move (due to reaching the ending condition) loses the game.
Alternatively, one can consider the convention of mis´ere play, where the player who is unable to move (due
to the ending condition) is declared the winner. As mentioned, we will use the normal play convention in
everything we do, which turns out to synergise more easily with the theory we will develop.
7.1 Nim and Impartial Games
Let’s take a look at the game of Nim. This will help us to familiarise ourselves with some of the concepts of
impartial games that we have discussed so far. Later we will see that the game of Nim plays a central role
in the theory of impartial games.
A game position in Nim consists of some piles of tokens, and a move in a given game position for either
player constitutes removing some (at least one, possibly all) tokens from one of the remaining piles. Following our normal play convention, the last player to move (i.e. the player who takes the last token(s) away
from the game) wins the game.
90
This means that the game can only end in a win/loss for either player. The fact that any starting game
position contains a finite number of tokens, and any move removes at least one token, means that the game
will last a finite number of turns and hence the ending condition (where the game ends since one player can’t
move as there will eventually be no tokens remaining in play) holds.
Figure 65 shows a Nim position with three piles of sizes 3, 2 and 1. We use coloured tokens (here red, blue
and green) to represent the pile a given token belongs to.
Figure 65: A Nim position with three piles of sizes 3, 2 and 1.
One possible move in this position, for example, could be to remove two red tokens (or two tokens from the
pile of size 3), another possible move could be to remove both blue tokens (or all tokens from the pile of size
2). We can represent each of these moves by:
3, 2, 1 −→ 1, 2, 1,
and 3, 2, 1 −→ 3, 1.
Note that, since moves can be made in any pile, the order of the piles doesn’t matter, so 1, 2, 1 is equivalent
to 1, 1, 2 for example (it doesn’t matter if we swapped the colour of the reds and blues).
We make a general definition:
Definition 7.42. An option of a game position in a combinatorial game is a position that can be reached
by a single move from the player to move in the current position.
By use of this definition, we can refer to 1, 2, 1 and 3, 1 as two possible options from the position 3, 2, 1.
Figure 66 shows all six possible options from the Nim game position 3, 2, 1.
91
Figure 66: Nim position 3, 2, 1 with all its options shown branching from it.
If we want to, we can represent the entire game tree (extensive form of the game) in this way by continuing
to draw out all possible options from every position. Note that in doing this some positions will be repeated
in the tree; we do not draw moves back up the tree to these positions from multiple predecessors though, we
repeat the position in the game tree so that every position has a unique history of moves.
7.1.1 Winning and Losing Positions
In impartial games, game positions belong to one of two possible classes:
• Winning positions: meaning that the current player (with optimal play) can force a win with a
suitable first ‘winning move’ (and subsequent ‘winning moves’ at all later positions); or
• Losing positions: meaning that every move from the current position leads to a winning position
of the other player, who can then force a win with optimal play, so then the current player will lose.
These are the only possibilities since, in an impartial game, the available moves are independent of the player
to move (by definition). If you are not yet convinced then do not fear, we will prove that this is indeed the
case shortly. Moreover, although the above defines what constitutes a winning/losing position, we will take
our usual definition of these positions as something slightly different once we have proved that all positions
are either winning or losing (you can think of the above as our definition ‘for now’).
Knowing that in impartial games positions are either winning or losing, let’s try to classify the game position
3, 2, 1 in Nim. To help us do this, consider the following observation of how we can play Nim optimally when
we have a Nim position with at most two piles:
• If there are no Nim piles left this defines a losing position under the normal play convention.
• If there is one Nim pile left then we are in a winning position; the final winning move is to remove
the entire pile.
• Two Nim piles are a winning position if and only if the piles are of different sizes; the winning move
is then to equalize their sizes by suitably reducing the larger pile, creating a losing position of two
equal sized piles. This is losing since the next move either removes a pile, leaving a single pile which
is winning, or it reduces one of the piles leaving two piles of different sizes, a winning position since
92
one can once again equalize the sizes of the piles from this position. Since all options from the original
position lead to winning positions, the position with two Nim piles of the same size is losing.
Every option of 3, 2, 1 is a winning position, because in each the player whose turn it is has a move to a
two-pile losing position, see figure 67.
Figure 67: Nim position 3, 2, 1 with all its options shown branching from it. A winning move from each of these
options is then shown.
Figure 67 shows sequences of two moves from position 3, 2, 1 to another position of two equal sized piles
which is losing as argued earlier. We only show one move for each second move as, in optimal play, only
such a winning move will be played. We see then that 3, 2, 1 is a losing position in Nim. Let’s formalise
the argument used in showing that two Nim piles were winning if and only if they were unequal.
Proposition 7.43. In an impartial game, a game position is losing if and only if all its options are winning
positions. A game position is winning if and only if at least one of its options is a losing position; moving
to that position is a winning move.
Proof. We will return to this proof shortly once we have understood the concept of top-down induction.
Remarks:
• This proposition applies ‘vacuously’ to the game position that has no options at all (a lost position),
since every option (of which there are none) is winning, hence the position is indeed losing.
• This proposition actually acts as what we will take as our definition of winning and losing positions.
This is not a circular definition, but a recursive one because the options of a game position are always
simpler (in the sense of being closer to the end of play in the game) than the current position.
93
7.1.2 Bouton’s solution for Nim
The game of Nim was solved by Charles Bouton, an American mathematican from Harvard, in 1901. In this
subsection we demonstrate Bouton’s solution strategy using the formidable Nim position 4, 5, 9, 14. Bouton’s
key insight was to write the pile sizes in binary. This is done for our game position 4, 5, 9, 14 in figure 68.
Figure 68: Binary representation of the Nim position 4, 5, 9, 14. The Nim sum for the position is shown at the
bottom of the table.
The bottom row of the table in figure 68 shows the Nim sum of the position 4, 5, 9, 14. The Nim sum is
defined to be addition modulo 2, without carry for each column of the table. More visually, this turns
out to correspond identically to the fact that the Nim sum has a 0 in a column if the number of 1’s in that
column is even, or a 1 in a column if the number of 1’s in the column is odd.
We now prove why the Nim sum of a position is important in determining if a position is winning or losing.
Proposition 7.44. A Nim position is losing if and only if the Nim sum equals zero for all columns in the
binary representation of the position; such a position is called a zero position (Note: this then means that
a position is winning if and only if the Nim sum ̸= 0 for all columns).
Proof. To show this is the case, according to proposition 7.43, we need to show:
(a). Every move from a zero position leads to a non-zero position which is therefore winning; and
(b). From every winning position (Nim sum ̸= 0) there is a move to reach a zero position.
To show (a) holds, note that a move changes exactly one pile, which corresponds to exactly one row in the
table of binary numbers. Since the player must take some tokens, the binary number in this row must change
in some way, causing at least one 0 to change to 1 or 1 to change to 0 in the row. This means that, in the
respective columns of where these changes occurred, the Nim sum must change from 0 to 1. This must be
the case since only one row had its values changed and so the odd/even parity of 1’s down the columns that
94
had values changed must have been changed.
For (b) we need to show that there is always at least one winning move for any position with non-zero Nim
sum. We show that this is indeed the case via the following algorithm:
• Choose the leftmost ‘1’ column in the Nim sum (which exists because not all columns are zero), which
represents the highest power of 2 used in the binary representation of the Nim sum. In our example
with position 4, 5, 9, 14 this is 4 = 22
, see figure 68.
• By definition, there are an odd number of piles which use this power of two in their binary representation. In our example there are three piles of sizes 4, 5, 14 that use the 22
. Choose any one of the
corresponding rows; in our example, let’s choose the row of pile size 5.
• In the chosen row, ‘flip’ the binary digits for each 1 in the Nim-sum. In our example this is columns
4 = 22 and 2 = 21
. The largest of the changed powers of two in this row was originally a digit 1 which
is changed to 0, so even if all subsequent digits were changed from 0 to 1, the resulting binary number
after all flips have taken place is a new, smaller integer (possibly zero, meaning that the move is to
remove the entire pile). A winning move is then to reduce the pile to this smaller size; in our example
from 5 to 3.
As a result of this process, the new Nim sum equals zero, so we have reached a zero position as required.
Exercise: As outlined throughout the proof, one winning move in our game position was to move from
4, 5, 9, 14 to 4, 3, 9, 14 by removing 2 tokens from the pile of size 5. There are a further two other possible
winning moves we could have made instead. Find them.
7.2 Top-down Induction
In any combinatorial game, any position could represent the starting position of another game (for example,
the Nim position 3, 2, 1 could be the start of the game, or could have been reached from the 4, 5, 9, 14 game
for instance). Because of this, when working with combinatorial games, we will often use the term game to
mean game position. This means that every game, G, has finitely many options G1, G2, · · · , Gm, which
themselves are games. These are reached from G by one of the allowed moves in G, see figure 69.
Figure 69: A game G with its m options: games G1, · · · , Gm.
95
The only exception to this is if m = 0, or, in other words, the game G has no options. We denote this game
by 0, which, under the normal play convention, defines a losing game.
Before formalising the notion of top-down induction, we first spend a moment to take a short detour and
discuss partial and total orders which will be important in our upcoming theory.
7.2.1 Partial and Total Orders
Definition 7.45. A binary relation ≃ on a set S is called a partial order if, for all x, y, z ∈ S, we have:
• ≃ is transitive: if x ≃ y and y ≃ z ⇒ x ≃ z;
• ≃ is refelxive: x ≃ x;
• ≃ is antisymmetric: x ≃ y and y ≃ x ⇒ x = y.
If, in addition to the above, we also have for all x, y ∈ S:
• ≃ is total: x ≃ y or y ≃ x,
then we call ≃ a total order.
Definition 7.46. For a given partial order ≃ on a set S, we define the strict order ∼ corresponding to ≃
by; for all x, y ∈ S:
x ∼ y ⇔ x ≃ y and x ̸= y.
Definition 7.47. An element x ∈ S is called minimal if ∄y ∈ S such that y ∼ x.
Examples:
• Any set S of real numbers has the familiar relation ≤ as a total order. < is the corresponding strict
order here.
• An important partial order is the set inclusion ⊆ on a set S of sets. A ⊆ B means set A is a subset
of B (allowing A = B). In general this is a partial order and not a total order since two sets can be
incomparable, for example, A = {1, 2} and B = {2, 3}. Here ⊂ is the corresponding strict order where
A ⊂ B means A is a proper subset of B (e.g A = {1}, B = {1, 2}).
7.2.2 Back to Top-Down Induction
Let’s now return to developing our theory for impartial games.
Definition 7.48. Consider a set S of games, defined by a starting game and all the games that can be
reached from it via any sequence of moves of the players. For two games; G, H ∈ S, we call H simpler than
G, denoted with the binary relation H ≤ G, if there is a sequence of moves that leads from G to H. We
allow for G = H where this sequence is empty.
96
Remarks:
• We will use the definition just given for the set S (i.e that S consists of some initial game and all
games that can be reached from it) regularly throughout this chapter, so much so that it will become
monotonous to repeat this definition without giving it some sort of name. Instead of naming it,
whenever we refer to set S henceforth, take S to be the set as defined in the previous definition. We
will make things clear where we change this notion.
• The corresponding strict ordering is denoted by < where H < G means that H is simpler than G but
we do not allow for H = G.
Proposition 7.49. The binary relation ≤ (which we say as ‘is simpler than’) on a set S of games (as
discussed above) forms a partial order.
Proof. Problem Set 7.
Proposition 7.50. Every non-empty subset, T, of S has a minimal element.
Proof. Suppose that this was not the case, i.e there was a non-empty subset T of S without a minimal
element. Take a game G ∈ T. Now because G is not minimal, there exists H ∈ T such that H < G, so
there is some sequence of moves from G to H.
Similarly, H is not minimal, so another game in T can be reached from H by some sequence of moves.
Continuing in this manner means we either run out of games left in T (so the last one is minimal) or create
an infinite sequence of moves which contradicts the ending condition. Note that we cannot re-visit any
game in this process, say G, since this implies that G < G which is nonsense. Thus we reach a contradiction
and so T has a minimal element.
We now prove a sweeping result which is true for all sets and partial orders when every subset of our set has
a minimal element. We will proceed to use the theorem in the case where the set S is our usual set of games
and the partial order is of being simpler than ≤.
Theorem 7.51 (Top-down Induction). Consider a set S with a partial order ≃ such that every non-empty
subset of S has a minimal element. Let P(x) be a statement about an element x ∈ S that may be true or
false. Assume that P(x) holds whenever P(y) holds for all y ∈ S such that y ∼ x. Then P(x) is true for all
x ∈ S. That is
(∀x : (∀y ∼ x : P(y)) ⇒ P(x)) ⇒ (∀x : P(x)). (25)
Proof. Suppose P(x) holds whenever it holds for all elements y ∈ S with y ∼ x. Now consider the set
T = {z ∈ S : P(z)is false}. Then P(x) is true for all x ∈ S if we can show that T is the empty set.
We do this by contradiction. Assume T is non-empty, which means by 7.50 that it has a minimal element,
call this x. Now all y ∈ S such that y ∼ x do not belong to T (since x was a minimal element of T), meaning
that P(y) is true. But, by our initial assumption, this implies that P(x) is also true, contradicting the fact
that x ∈ T. So T is empty, as claimed.
97
Remarks:
• We call this method of induction top-down induction since we start ‘from the top’ (element x), and
use the property that we know is true about elements y simpler than x (the ‘down’ part).
• Top-down induction has a very close relationship with strong induction. In fact, if we are working
on the totally ordered natural numbers, N, then these two methods are identical, however top-down
induction only needs for ≤ to be partially ordered on S, hence the different naming convention to
distinguish this.
• But what about the base case? Don’t all induction methods need this? Yes. In the above proof this
was glossed over as it turns out to simply be vacuously true: if x is a minimal element, then there are
no y ∼ x. Therefore, for minimal x, we simply have that P(x) is true. This is the base case.
Now we can return to our former proposition 7.43 and finally prove this with the help of top-down induction.
In fact, you’ll do this on problem set 7 and we will now freely use this result: in any impartial game, a game
position is losing if and only if all its options are winning positions. A game position is winning if and only
if at least one of its options is a losing position. As mentioned earlier we will also extend our definitions of
winning and losing positions to include these properties.
7.3 Game Sums
Combinatorial games can often be decomposed into separate parts. It turns out that this is a very useful
property that we formalise in this section.
Definition 7.52. Suppose that G and H are games with options G1,· · · , Gn and H1,· · · , Hm, respectively.
We define the game sum of G and H, denoted G + H, to be the game with options:
G1 + H, G2 + H, · · · , Gn + H, G + H1, G + H2, · · · , G + Hm. (26)
Remarks:
• Note that this essentially means that the player makes a move in game G or in game H; the other part
of the game sum remains untouched (there is no given option of the form G3 + H4 for example or of
anything different entirely).
• This is a recursive definition since the game sum is defined in terms of its options, which are themselves
game sums. Importantly these are simpler games, so this recursive definition makes sense as it tumbles
down to the ending condition.
Example: As a short example to demonstrate this idea and its usefulness, consider the Nim game 3, 2, 1.
This, for example, is a sum of the games G = 2, 1 and H = 3, i.e
G + H = 3, 2, 1.
An option of the player in this game corresponds to either removing some tokens from the pile of size 1,
from the pile of size 2; in either case a possible move in game G leaving game H alone, or removing some
tokens from the pile of size 3; a possible move in H whilst leaving game G alone. Notice that this gives all
98
options as in the definition of the game sum.
In fact we can go one step further with this, any Nim game is just the game sum of its individual Nim piles,
because the player moves in exactly one of these piles.
You may also notice some other properties of the game sum from this example that we will discuss now.
Proposition 7.53. Denoting the losing game with no options by 0, then for any games G, H and J we
have:
• Commutativity of +:
G + H = H + G, (27)
• Associativity of +:
(G + H) + J = G + (H + J), (28)
• Zero element for +:
G + 0 = G. (29)
Proof. You’ll prove these on problem set 7.
Remarks:
• We can in fact easily generalise both (27) and (28). In a sum of several games G1, G2, · · · , Gn the
player moves in exactly one of these games, which does not depend on how these games were arranged,
so that we can write the game sum unambiguously as
G1 + G2 + · · · + Gn.
• Everywhere in this proposition and in this chapter = should be read as ‘is the same game as’. This
feels obvious right now, but we will shortly introduce the notion of equivalence of games, so it is
important to be clear of the difference.
The previous proposition has given us commutativity, associativity and a zero element for the sum of games.
The next thing we would like to have on this list is the concept of an ‘inverse’ game; i.e for any game G, can
we construct a game −G such that G + (−G) = 0.
This would be great, however, we can immediately look at this equality as stated and notice there is a
problem. If game G has any options, then by our definition of +, regardless of whatever the game −G turns
out to be, the LHS will have options, but the RHS is the losing game; the game defined to have no options,
so these things cannot be equal.
This motivates our next idea. What could we do instead to ensure this ‘inverse’ can exist?
99
7.4 Equivalence of Games
We introduce the notion of equivalence of games via the following definition.
Definition 7.54. Two games G and H are called equivalent, written G ≡ H, if and only if for any other
game J, the game sum G + J is losing if and only if H + J is losing.
Lemma 7.55. The binary relation of equivalence, ≡, is an equivalence relation between games, this means
that it is:
• Reflexive: G ≡ G, for any game G;
• Symmetric: if G ≡ H then H ≡ G; and
• Transitive: if G ≡ H and H ≡ K, then G ≡ K.
Proof. You’ll show this on problem set 7.
Let’s discuss this definition a little bit to understand better what it is saying. First notice that if we take
J = 0 in the definition of equivalence then we find that if the games G and H are equivalent then either
both are losing games or both are winning games. So equivalence of G and H means that the games always
have the same outcome class (winning/losing). However it is a stronger statement than just this, as it not
only holds for when J = 0, but this property holds in any game sum G + J and H + J for any other game
J. Let’s take a look at an example to see this.
Example: Consider a Nim pile of size 2 and a Nim pile of size 1. We ask if these games are equivalent?
Indeed let G = Nim pile of size 2, H = Nim pile of size 1, then, taking J = 0 we have G + J = Nim pile of
size 2, a winning game, and H + J = Nim pile of size 1, also a winning game. So this might lead us to think
the games G and H are equivalent.
Instead, consider taking J as a Nim pile of size 1. Then G + J = 2, 1, which is a winning Nim position
(remove one token from the pile of size two to have two equal piles), but notice that H + J = 1, 1, which is
a losing Nim position. Hence we can conclude that G and H are not equivalent.
This shows us that there is something stronger with equivalence beyond just belonging to the same outcome
class. Perhaps now, you might think, that equivalence is so strong a condition that two games being equivalent means they are identical games, i.e. does G ≡ H mean the same thing as G = H, i.e that G and H
are the same game?
Although we may struggle to show this with our theory just yet, it turns out it is true that the Nim game
consisting of a single pile with 1 token is equivalent to the Nim game 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, consisting of five piles of
tokens of amounts 5 to 1. These are not the same game, so there is something more subtle going on with
equivalence: it is a stronger statement than just belonging to the same outcome class, but not as strong as
saying that the games are the same.
We continue to investigate.
100
Proposition 7.56. Two Nim piles are equivalent if and only if they have equal size.
Proof. (⇒): We take the contrapositive of this statement and instead prove that if two Nim piles have
different sizes, then they are not equivalent.
Indeed, let G and H be two Nim piles of different sizes. Consider J = G in the definition of equivalence.
Then G + G is a losing game (since this game consists of two Nim piles of the same size, which we proved
was losing), but H + G is winning (as it is two Nim piles of different sizes). Hence, by definition, G and H
are not equivalent, as we needed to show.
(⇐): If G and H are Nim piles of equal size then they are the same game and therefore equivalent.
So we have seen that equivalence of games means they belong to the same outcome class, but also that two
different winning games (like in our example with the games 1 and 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 and also from 7.56) are not
necessarily equivalent.
However, that fact does not hold for two different losing games, and we will now prove that any two losing
games are equivalent, because they are all equivalent to the game 0 that has no options.
Proposition 7.57. G is a losing game if and only if G ≡ 0.
Proof. (⇐): If G ≡ 0 then we use J = 0 in our definition of equivalence giving G + 0 losing ⇔ 0 + 0 losing,
that is G losing ⇔ 0 losing, which is the definition of a losing game, so G is losing.
(⇒): Suppose G is a losing game. We need to show that G ≡ 0, that is, for any other game J, the game
G + J is losing if and only if 0 + J is losing. Now 0 + J = J, so this amounts to proving:
(a). G + J is losing ⇒ J is losing, and
(b). J is losing ⇒ G + J is losing.
Let’s start with proving (b). Let J be losing (and we have that G is losing by our initial assumption). We
want to show that G + J is losing, meaning that every option of G + J is winning.
Any such option is of the form G′ + J where G′
is an option of G, or of the form G + J
′
, where J
′
is an
option of J. Let’s start with the first type. Now because G is losing, G′
is winning, so G′ has some winning
move to an option G′′ that is losing.
Note that G′′ is a losing game which is simpler than G, so this motivates us to appeal to top-down induction,
where we can assume from the inductive hypothesis (that (b) holds) that G′′ and J are losing ⇒ G′′ + J is
losing. This means that the option G′ + J is winning because it has as an option the losing game G′′ + J.
Note that G′ + J was an arbitrary option with a first move in the game G. We still need to show that the
same result also holds for an arbitrary option of the form G+J
′
, but this follows in a similar manner to how
we have just argued.
101
This means that all options of G + J are winning games, so therefore G + J is a losing game, proving (b).
Now let’s prove (a). Let’s do this by contradiction. Suppose that G + J is losing but J is winning. That
means there is a winning move to some option J
′ of J where J
′
is a losing game. Now using (b); this implies
that, since G and J
′ are losing games, G + J
′
is losing. But G + J
′
is an option of G + J, which would
represent a winning move from G + J, meaning G + J is winning. This contradicts our assumption that
G + J is losing. Hence J must be losing so (a) holds.
Corollary 7.58. Any two losing games G and H are equivalent.
Proof. Let G and H be losing games. By 7.57 we have G ≡ 0 and H ≡ 0. But ≡ is an equivalence relation
between games, meaning that it is transitive, so then G ≡ 0 and 0 ≡ H means that G ≡ H.
Lemma 7.59. For all games G, H and K we have:
G ≡ H ⇒ G + K ≡ H + K.
Proof. Let G ≡ H. Now G+K ≡ H +K means that (G+K)+J is losing if and only if (H +K)+J is losing,
for any other game J. By associativity (28) this means G + (K + J) is losing if and only if H + (K + J) is
losing. But this holds from the definition that G ≡ H taking (K + J) as the arbitrary added game.
Lemma 7.60. Let J be a losing game. Then G + J ≡ G for any game G.
Proof. By 7.57, J ≡ 0. Now by 7.59 we have G + J = J + G ≡ 0 + G = G.
This means that any losing game J can take the role of a zero element when we consider game sums, i.e
G + J ≡ G for any game G as stated in the lemma. We can think about this conceptually in the following
way: any move in the J component of the game G + J has a ‘counter-move’ in this component back to a
losing position (leaving G alone) since J is losing, eventually continuing this process game J will deplete into
the 0 game with no options, so adding J to any game G doesn’t affect whether game G is winning or losing.
Our next proposition finally allows us to return to our old problem about having no inverse game.
Proposition 7.61 (The Copycat Principle). G + G ≡ 0 for any impartial game G.
Proof. Let G be an impartial game. By proposition 7.57, the condition G + G ≡ 0 amounts to showing that
G + G is a losing game. Let’s prove this by top-down induction by showing that every option of G + G is
winning.
Any option of G + G is of the form G′ + G for an option G′ of G. But the next player then has the winning
move to the game G′ +G′ which is a losing game by the inductive assumption since G′ +G′
is simpler than
G + G. Hence G + G is losing and so G + G ≡ 0.
These latest results allow us to simplify complex game positions significantly. As an example to see where
we are going and what we are working towards, consider the formidable Nim position 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 8. Is this
winning or losing?
102
Figure 70: The Nim position 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 8 with braces showing parts equivalent to 0.
The game sum of two Nim piles of size 8 is a losing position, hence by proposition 7.57 these piles are
equivalent to a losing, or 0 game. We also now from our earlier work in the chapter that the game 1, 2, 3
is losing. Hence we can conclude that the Nim game 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 8, as shown in figure 70, is equivalent to a
single Nim pile of size 7.
1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 8 ≡ 1, 2, 3 + 7 + 8, 8 ≡ 0 + 7 + 0 ≡ 7.
This is therefore a winning game with a winning move to remove the pile of size 7 leaving the sum of the
two losing games; a losing position.
Lemma 7.62. For impartial games G and H, then G ≡ H if and only if G + H ≡ 0.
Proof. (⇒): If G ≡ H, then by lemma 7.59 (adding H) we have:
G + H ≡ H + H ≡ 0,
by use of the copycat principle 7.61.
(⇐): Conversely, if G + H ≡ 0, then
G ≡ G + 0 ≡ G + H + H ≡ 0 + H ≡ H,
where we have used the idea that H + H ≡ 0 by the copycat principle in the second equivalence.
7.4.1 A Remark on Mis´ere games
We make a final remark here on mis´ere games; games where the final player to move loses. A losing position
in mis´ere Nim for example is the single pile with a single token in it. Let’s call this game J.
If we add this game J to another game G then this reverses the outcome class of G, since the player can
remove the token from game J, leaving game G remaining. This certainly means we don’t have G + J ≡ G
as in lemma 7.60.
Further, in mis´ere Nim it turns out 1, 1 is winning but 2, 2 is losing, so there is no copycat principle as in
proposition 7.61 for mis´ere games.
Regardless, mis´ere Nim is well understood, but general mis´ere games are not! Normal play games however
have the nice equivalence structure we have developed in the last section.
103
7.5 Notation for Nim piles
We will now develop some notation for single Nim piles since they will become very important for us going
forward.
Definition 7.63. If G is a single Nim pile with n ≥ 0 tokens in it, then we denote this game by ∗n. This
game is specified by its n options, defined recursively as
∗0, ∗1, ∗2, · · · , ∗(n − 1).
Remarks:
• ∗0 is the empty pile with no tokens in it, i.e ∗0 ≡ 0. We will alternate between these notations, but
often continue to write just 0 for the losing game.
• A general Nim position is a game sum of several Nim piles. Earlier we wrote these positions by listing
the pile sizes, e.g 1, 2, 3. We now represent this game as
∗1 + ∗2 + ∗3,
a sum of games of single Nim piles.
Definition 7.64. If G ≡ ∗m for an impartial game G, then m is called the Nim value of G.
Remarks:
• This value m is unique as Nim piles of different sizes are not equivalent. We proved this in proposition 7.56.
• The Nim value is sometimes referred to as the Sprague-Grundy value, the sg-value or the Grundy value.
All of these are named after Sprague (1935) and Grundy (1939) who each independently discovered
the theory.
7.6 The Mex Rule
In this section we will prove a fascinating result about impartial games and the notion we mentioned that
the game Nim has a central importance in the theory of understanding any impartial game. Indeed shortly
we will prove that every impartial game is equivalent to some single Nim pile. In fact the theorem we will
prove, known as the mex rule, is stronger than just this and allows us to determine precisely what size of
Nim pile an impartial game is equivalent to.
Before arriving at the mex rule we first define the minimum excluded number (mex) of a set.
Definition 7.65. For a finite set of natural numbers S, the minimum excluded number of S, written
mex(S), is defined as
mex(S) = min{k ∈ N : k /∈ S}.
In other words, mex(S) is the smallest non-negative integer not contained in S. For example;
• mex({0, 1, 3, 5}) = 2,
104
• mex({1, 2, 8}) = 0,
• mex(∅) = 0.
We now state and prove the mex rule.
Theorem 7.66 (The Mex Rule). Any impartial game G has Nim value m (that is, G ≡ ∗m), where m
is uniquely determined as follows: for each option H of G, let H have Nim value sH, and let S = {sH :
H is an option of G}. Then m = mex(S), that is, G ≡ ∗(mex(S)).
Proof. We will prove this via top-down induction. First, if S = ∅, then G = 0 = ∗0. Now assume, as per
top-down induction, that each option H of G has Nim value sH, where sH is itself the mex of the Nim values
of the options of H. Let S be the set of these Nim values, i.e
S = {sH : H is an option of G},
and denote m = mex(S). We will show that G + ∗m ≡ 0, which means by lemma 7.62 that G ≡ ∗m as
required.
The game G + ∗m is losing if all of its options are winning.
First consider an option of the form G+∗h for some h < m, i.e the player makes a move in the Nim pile ∗m of
the game sum G+∗m. In this case, h ∈ S because m = mex(S), and based on how S was constructed, there
is an option H of G such that h = sH, i.e H ≡ ∗h. This means that the other player has the counter-move
(by moving in G) from G + ∗h to the losing position H + ∗h ≡ ∗h + ∗h ≡ 0, by the copycat principle 7.61.
Thus all options of G + ∗m of the form G + ∗h (h < m) are indeed winning.
Second we consider the possible options of G + ∗m of the form H + ∗m where H is an option of G. Since
H is an option of G, then H ≡ ∗sH and sH ∈ S. This means that either sH < m or sH > m (sH ̸= m as
m = mex(S) so m /∈ S).
First let’s consider sH < m. In this case the other player counters by moving from H + ∗m to the losing
position H + ∗sH ≡ ∗sH + ∗sH ≡ 0.
Secondly, if sH > m, we appeal to the inductive hypothesis that says sH is the mex of the Nim values of the
options of H. This means that the Nim value of one of the options of H is m, call such an option H′ ≡ ∗m.
The other player counters by moving from H + ∗m to the losing position H′ + ∗m ≡ ∗m + ∗m ≡ 0. Thus all
options of G + ∗m of the form H + ∗m (for H an option of G) are also winning.
But any option of G + ∗m has to be of the form H + ∗m or G + ∗h; thus all options of G + ∗m are winning.
Hence G + ∗m is a losing game and so by proposition 7.57 G + ∗m ≡ 0, as required.
Remark: If we find mex(S) = 0 for some game G, then this means that either all options of G are equivalent to positive Nim heaps, so all are winning, or G has no options at all. Thus, in this case, G is losing
and indeed G ≡ 0.
Let’s study some example games.
105
7.6.1 The Rook-move Game
Using the mex rule any impartial game can be played like Nim. To do this we need to know the Nim values
of the different positions in the game. We can evaluate these recursively by the mex rule.
Let’s see this concept via an example game; the rook-move game. Consider a rook positioned on some square
of a chessboard which extends indefinitely to the right and to the bottom but has sides on the left and at
the top, see figure 71.
Figure 71: The Rook move Game with a single Rook on the board.
We number the rows and columns 0, 1, 2, · · · starting from the top left square. On a given turn, a player
must move the rook either to the left or upwards (and not both). The rook can be moved any number of
squares, but must move at least one square. The first player who can no longer move the rook, because it
is in the top-left square, loses (or we can think of this as the player who moves the rook into the top-left
corner square wins).
Activity: Draw out a board on paper and use a small object to represent the rook. Play a few games with
your neighbour. Choose a different starting square for the rook each time.
With the mex rule to aid us, let’s start analysing the game. A rook in the top-left corner square is equivalent
to 0 because the rook can’t move, so this is precisely the game with no options.
Now consider the game where the rook is positioned just to the right of this square. This game has as its
106
only option the 0 game (the rook can only be moved into the corner), so by the mex rule our current game
has Nim value m = mex({0}) = 1, thus this game has Nim value 1 and is equivalent to a single Nim pile
of size 1. In our new notation we denote this game as ∗1. Consider now the game where the rook is in the
position just to the right of this square. This game has options of 0 and ∗1, hence by the mex rule it is
equivalent to the game ∗2.
In this manner we can continue to determine the Nim values of all squares along the top row, they are the
games ∗i in column i. Similarly, an analogous argument holds for all the cells in the first column, so we can
determine their Nim values.
But what about when the rook is on some square in the centre of the board. Well we can move it to any
square above this cell, or to its left. So in general, a position on the board is evaluated by knowing all Nim
values for the squares to the left and those on top of it, i.e the Nim values for all options of that position.
So, currently, we can determine the Nim value of the cell in row 1, column 1: it has two options: the square
to its left, which is ∗1, and the square above, which is also ∗1. Therefore, by the mex rule, this square is
equivalent to mex({1}) = 0, so it is a losing position.
This process can now be continued (for example we now have the Nim values of all options of the squares
row 1 column 2 and row 2 column 1) to recursively find the Nim value of any position in the rook move
game. Figure 72 shows the Nim values for several of the positions of the rook.
Figure 72: The Rook move Game with the Nim value of several squares shown.
107
So, for example, consider the square in row 2 column 3 as shown in figure 72. To its left are the entries ∗2,
∗3 and 0, and above it are the entries ∗3 and ∗2. Thus, the Nim value of this square is mex({0, 2, 3}) = 1,
so the game with the rook on this square is equivalent to ∗1, a Nim pile of size 1.
Remarks:
• The losing squares on the chessboard turn out to all be along the diagonal. Some of you may have
noticed the importance of the diagonal whilst playing a few games. Indeed, we can apply the copycat
principle to move a player back onto the diagonal when the player moves off of it.
• Secondly, you might have noticed that the rook move game is actually just Nim with two piles in
disguise! A rook in row i, column j can either reduce i by moving up, or reduce j by moving left, so is
precisely the sum of the Nim piles ∗i + ∗j. Indeed, we can now see clearly this is a losing game if and
only if i = j and the Nim piles have equal size.
The Nim values of each position have more use than just helping to distinguish between winning and losing
positions. They become very useful as we begin to complicate games, for example, suppose we place multiple
rooks on the board in the rook move game...
7.6.2 The Multiple Rook-move Game
Consider now the rook-move game, but where we allow multiple rooks to be placed on the board. We allow
the rooks to occupy the same space where necessary. On a given turn a player moves one of the rooks. As
before, when a player can no longer move a rook they have lost the game.
Activity: Play a game or two with a partner. Put 2/3/4 rooks on the board. Can you see how to analyse
the game?
This game corresponds to a game sum of single rook-move games. Using figure 72, there are some positions
we are able to analyse, for example a game with two rooks where one is in row 2, column 3, and the other
in row 0, column 1 is equivalent to the game ∗1 + ∗1 which we know is losing.
But what about two rooks where one is placed in row 4, column 2 and the other in row 1, column 3, equivalent
to the game ∗6 + ∗2 ... is this winning? Losing? In fact we can ask a further question which answers our
first one: by theorem 7.66, the mex rule, we know that this game ∗6 + ∗2 is equivalent to a single Nim pile
of some size, but what size exactly is this?
7.7 Sums of Nim Piles
In this section we will show how to calculate the Nim value for any game sum of Nim piles. So shortly you will
be able to deduce, for example, what game the game sum ∗5+∗7+∗23 is equivalent to, and in good time too.
With our work so far, we know some examples, so let’s start there. We studied the Nim position ∗1 +∗2 +∗3
in detail earlier in the chapter, showing it was a losing position, hence ∗1 + ∗2 + ∗3 ≡ 0. This means by
108
lemma 7.62 that:
∗1 + ∗2 ≡ ∗3,
∗2 + ∗3 ≡ ∗1, and
∗1 + ∗3 ≡ ∗2.
So we see from the second two above that the sizes of the Nim piles cannot simply be added together to get
the equivalent Nim pile.
Definition 7.67. If ∗k ≡ ∗m + ∗n, then we call k the Nim sum of m and n, written k = m ⊕ n.
Now let’s observe a theorem that is going to enable us to compute whatever Nim sums we want.
Theorem 7.68. Let n ∈ Z
+, and represent n as a unique sum of powers of 2, i.e write n = 2a+2b+2c+· · · ,
where a > b > c > · · · ≥ 0. Then
∗n ≡ ∗(2a
) + ∗(2b
) + ∗(2c
) + · · · . (30)
Proof. Problem Set 7.
Let’s discuss the use of theorem 7.68 through an example. The RHS of (30) is a sum of games of single Nim
piles whose sizes are distinct powers of 2. So, for example, let m = 9 = 23 + 20 = 8 + 1, thus
∗m = ∗9 ≡ ∗8 + ∗1.
Similarly let n = 14 = 23 + 22 + 21 = 8 + 4 + 2, thus
∗n = ∗14 ≡ ∗8 + ∗4 + ∗2.
Hence, we have that the game sum:
∗m + ∗n = ∗9 + ∗14 ≡ ∗8 + ∗1 + ∗8 + ∗4 + ∗2
≡ ∗4 + ∗2 + ∗1
≡ ∗7,
where we have used the fact that we know ∗8 + ∗8 ≡ 0 in the second line, and applied theorem 7.68 again in
the final line as all the games were powers of two. We can write this as 9 ⊕ 14 = 7 using the Nim sum. This
tells us, for example, that ∗7 + ∗9 + ∗14 ≡ 0 is a losing Nim position.
The theorem therefore allows us to find the Nim sum of any set of numbers by writing each number as a
sum of distinct powers of two, then cancelling out repetitions in pairs, and finally summing the remaining
powers of two. For example, let’s take the Nim position 4, 5, 9, 14 that we saw earlier was winning and ask
precisely what Nim value this position has. Well
4 ⊕ 5 ⊕ 9 ⊕ 14 = 4 ⊕ (4 + 1) ⊕ (8 + 1) ⊕ (8 + 4 + 2)
= 4 ⊕ 2
= 6.
109
Hence ∗4+∗5+∗9+∗14 ≡ ∗6. So now we can say that the game position was indeed winning and equivalent
to a Nim pile of size ∗6.
Exercise: Can you see how to find what all the winning moves are from the position 4, 5, 9, 14 using the
calculation above?
7.8 Example Games
To finish our chapter, let’s finally put all of our theory to the test by trying to solve some examples of
impartial games.
7.8.1 The Queen-move Game
Consider now a chessboard exactly as in the rook-move game (extending indefinitely to the right and below)
with a chess queen placed in some square on the board. On a given move the player must move the queen
any number of squares (at least one) either vertically up, horizontally left, or diagonally up-left. The
winner is the player who moves the queen into the top-left square of the board. Figure 73 gives a schematic
of an example position.
Figure 73: The Queen move Game.
This game can be played like Nim with two piles of tokens where a player may remove tokens from either
pile but with the added move of being able to reduce both piles by the same number of tokens.
110
Activity: Play the game with a partner. What squares should you move the queen to?
Figure 74 shows the Nim values of some of the squares in the queen-move game. These are calculated
recursively using the mex rule starting from the top-left corner square.
Figure 74: The Queen move Game with the Nim value of several squares shown.
We see that winning moves in this game move the queen onto one of the the 0 cells; leaving your opponent
in one of the losing positions.
7.8.2 Sum of a Queen-move Game and a Nim Pile
Consider now the queen-move game with the queen initially positioned in row 3, column 4 added to a Nim
pile of size 4, as shown in figure 75.
In this game sum the player may either move the queen or take some of the tokens from the pile. When a
player is unable to do either of these, they lose the game.
111
Figure 75: A game sum of a queen-move game and a Nim pile of size 4.
Question: Determine the Nim value of the game and, if winning, give all possible winning moves from the
position.
Answer: Consulting figure 74, we see the queen occupies a square with entry ∗2. This means that currently
our game has Nim value 2 ⊕ 4 = 6, which is winning.
We can only move in one of these games, so to set the Nim value of the position to 0, i.e. to play a winning
move and leave our opponent in a losing position, we want to change ∗2 to ∗4 or ∗4 to ∗2. This means we
can either:
• Remove 2 tokens from the Nim pile, giving the game 2 ⊕ 2 = 0;
• Move the queen to row 0, column 4, giving the game 4 ⊕ 4 = 0;
• Move the queen to row 3, column 1, giving the game 4 ⊕ 4 = 0.
These are all possible winning moves from the current position.
112
Chapter 8: Game Trees and Games of Imperfect Information
In this chapter we will use the extensive form representation of games, or in other words, game trees, as a
way to examine sequential (one player moving after another) games of imperfect information (this is
where some elements or moves made in the game are unknown to some of the players in the game).
To make it clear when we will introduce the imperfect information elements, the chapter has been split into
two parts, part I, which you are about to start, which builds on the basis of representing games of perfect
information as trees that we saw in chapter 1 and what we might take as solutions to such games, and part
II which introduces imperfect information to such games and discusses how we may tackle this.
Part I: Game Trees of Perfect Information
8.1 Game Trees
We have seen examples of game trees in chapter 1 of the course. In the examples so far, every internal node
in the tree has been what we may call a decision node (where one player needs to make a choice), but we
can also include chance nodes (where something probabilistic may happen). Throughout this chapter we
will represent decision nodes with black circles and chance nodes with white squares. Terminal nodes, or
simply branches that end the tree, result in an ending of the game and we assign one payoff to each player
at these points. We will assign player A’s payoff first, followed by player B’s, and so on (i.e the order of the
payoffs follows the order of the naming of the players), regardless of the order these players may have moved
in the game tree.
Figure 76: An example tree game we will study throughout this chapter involving firms A and B.
113
Figure 76 depicts a game in extensive form (a game tree). In this game firm A competes with firm B over
selling their similar products in the market. Initially in this game a chance move occurs where there is a
50% chance firm A develops a strong product and a 50% chance firm A’s product is weak. This strong/weak
product is indicated on the game tree at A’s following decision nodes. After this, firm A can either announce
their product on the market (choices a1 and a3) or can cede the market to firm B (choices a2 and a4) and
not release their product. After this choice from firm A, if firm A chose to announce their product (chose
a1 or a3) then firm B can choose to be bought out by firm A (choices b1 and b3) taking a smaller share of
the market profits, or can compete against firm A in the market (choices b2 and b4).
8.2 Backward Induction
When analysing a game tree, ‘optimal’ play for each player should aim to maximise their payoff. When a
player is the last to move, this can be done irrespective of any prior players’ moves. In our example game,
firm B is last to move, so we can analyse what they should do. In the left hand decision node of player B
(the one reached if A ended up strong and then played a1), B should play b1 since this gives them payoff of
1 where b2 would yield them −1. In the right hand decision node (the one reached if A ended up weak and
then played a3), B should play b4 (giving payoff 5 where b3 would give 1).
Consequently, knowing that B will do this, firm A is in a position to respond accordingly. Firm A will thus
choose a1 in their left hand decision node (as this would lead to B’s left hand decision node where they
will play b1 as discussed above) leading to a payoff of 3 for A which is greater than the payoff of 0 they
would receive by choosing a2. Moreover, in the right hand decision node, A chooses a4 getting a payoff of 0
(since by choosing a3 they know B would choose b4 in their resulting decision node yielding A a payoff of −1).
Having analysed the game in this way, from the branch ends backwards, the chosen optimal moves are often
represented on the game tree diagram using arrows, as shown below in figure 77.
Figure 77: Arrows showing the result of backward induction on the game tree.
114
To deal with a chance node (like the one at the beginning of our example game), we always assume as we
have throughout the course that our players will be interested in maximising their expected payoffs. At a
chance node we can thus remove the chance node and replace it with the resulting expected payoffs for each
player that would occur as a result of the subsequent ‘best’ play as analysed earlier. In our example game,
the chance node (and thus in essence the whole tree since the chance node is the root of the tree) could be
replaced with the pair of payoffs 1/2 × 3 + 1/2 × 0 = 3/2 for firm A and 1/2 × 1 + 1/2 × 4 = 5/2 for firm B.
This process of analysing the game we have discussed throughout this section is called backward induction.
Provided all subsequent decision nodes have had moves decided, this process will determine a move/moves
for every decision node in the game tree.
8.2.1 When it gets a little fiddly
This process of backward induction can sometimes encounter a small caveat. We illustrate this in the example
game shown in figure 78.
Figure 78: An example game to illustrate when backward induction gets a little tricky.
Applying backward induction, starting with player B, leads to a problem when multiple moves yield maximal
payoff to the player. Both moves b1 and b2 are maximal here for player B. To indicate this we use two
different arrows (to distinguish between them we use colours: here red and blue), see figure 79 below.
In turn this means that player A, when choosing between a1 and a2, will get payoff 4 for a2 but the payoff
when they choose a1 depends on the choice of player B: if that was b1, then A gets 4, and A can choose
either of a1 or a2. If player B chooses b2 however, then the payoff to player A is maximised by playing a2.
Thus, observing figure 79 and the resulting combinations of coloured arrows, possible combinations of moves
that could arise by backward induction are (listing moves for each player): (a1, b1), (a2, b1) and (a2, b2).
115
Figure 79: Backward induction arrows on the example game.
Note that, by now considering the game forwards from the beginning, by playing a1, A risks the chance of
B playing b2, leading to the case where a1 would have been a sub-optimal choice for A. Upon performing
backward induction, we do not argue that player A should not play a1 because of this (nor if a similar issue
were to happen to another player in a game). The process of backward induction merely aims to determine
lists of moves for each player (in fact these lists of moves are pure strategies - we will go over this in the
next section) that would lead to respective maximal payoffs. We will discuss what we may take as solutions
to such game trees shortly!
Remark: If there is always only one move that gives a a maximal payoff for a player at every decision node
in a game tree, then it can be proved that backward induction leads to a unique recommendation of
moves for the players (like in our primary example with firms A and B).
8.3 Strategies in Game Trees
In the first chapter of the course we discussed pure strategies but didn’t talk in much detail at all about
considering what pure strategies ‘look like’ in the context of extensive form games. In this section we dip
into a little more detail.
Definition 8.69. In a game tree a pure strategy for a player specifies a move for every decision node of
that player.
We will write down a pure strategy for a player as a list of moves, one for each decision node of the player.
For example, in the game tree in figure 76 from earlier, the pure strategies of firm A are a1a3, a1a4, a2a3
and a2a4. Those of firm B are b1b3, b1b4, b2b3 and b2b4. This ordering is done according to a fixed order
of the decision nodes in the tree so that each move is identified uniquely. In this course I will employ the
following convention: the first move in a pure strategy refers to the move to be made in the topmost,
leftmost decision node for that player. The second move the topmost, next leftmost node, and so on until
the topmost, rightmost decision node has a move specified. Then the next highest, leftmost decision node,
and so on counting decision nodes from left to right as we descend from top to bottom.
116
Remarks:
• This convention I will employ depends on how the game tree is drawn. For example, I could have drawn
the left hand decision node for firm B slightly lower than that of the right hand decision node, meaning
that I would specify a move for this decision node second when writing down the pure strategies of
firm B. This, of course, does not affect the analysis of the game at all, so don’t worry about how your
trees are drawn - just try to stick to a naming convention that is clear which move is being made where
in your tree (I will order moves according to the convention above and typically try to align decision
nodes at the same vertical heights when this makes sense to do so when drawing game trees).
• As mentioned at the end of the last section, the result of backward induction leads to a strategy
profile(s): a sequence of moves for each player (one at each of their decision nodes), i.e a pure strategy
for each player.
8.3.1 The strategic form of a game tree
When considering sequential games in a tree, backward induction may help us to determine some strategies
which lead to pairs of maximal payoffs for the players, but sometimes more can be understood about the
game by considering its strategic form.
Definition 8.70. The strategic form of a game tree is defined by the set of strategies for each player
according to the previous definition and the expected payoff to each player resulting from each strategy
profile.
Figure 80 below shows the strategic form of the game tree of our example game between firms A and
B from figure 76. Exercise: Check that you can reproduce this according to the definition above.
Figure 80: The strategic form of the game tree of our example game.
117
Note that there is a subtlety here in that this is not exactly another representation of the same game. The
strategic form game in figure 80 is played somewhat differently to the game tree from figure 76 since play
proceeds sequentially in the game tree but the strategic form is assumed to be played simultaneously
(players decide their strategies at the same time - just like much of what we have discussed throughout the
course).
Exercise: Determine all equilibria in the strategic form game in figure 80.
Remark: In the game tree in figure 77, backward induction specified the unique strategy profile (a1a4, b1b4).
If you have completed the previous exercise you will notice that this is also an equilibrium of the strategic
form of the game tree in figure 80. As has been the way I have tried to introduce fascinating new results
to you throughout the course, this once again is not a coincidence and this result holds more generally (see
shortly)!
8.3.2 Reduced Strategies
Consider the game tree in figure 81 below.
Figure 81: A game tree to showcase the concept of reduced strategies.
According to our definition of pure strategies in a game tree, player A has four pure strategies in this game
tree: a1a3, a1a4, a2a3 and a2a4 (all possibilities of a choice of one of their two available moves at each of
their decision nodes). Player B has two pure strategies here: b1 and b2.
Figure 82 shows the strategic form of the game tree for this game.
118
Figure 82: Strategic form of the game tree from figure 81.
Remark: Make sure you are comfortable with how to produce these strategic forms of game trees (more
practice on the problem set).
By staring at figure 82 a little, notice that rows a2a3 and a2a4 have identical payoffs. This could just be a
feature of the game, but may be due another reason: looking closer, we see that if player A selects a2 at their
first decision node, then they never reach their second decision node (perhaps you spotted this immediately
earlier and knew this would cause some repetition in the strategic form of the game tree).
Thus, since this is entirely down to the choice of player A themself (they have complete control over whether
they want to arrive at their second decision node), it makes sense to replace the strategies a2a3 and a2a4
with a less specific ‘strategy’: a2∗ that prescribes move a2 only. The ∗ is used as a placeholder to mean
any unspecified move. In some texts this star is dropped completely, but often in a larger game tree the
star offers clarity over exactly which decision nodes have unspecified moves, so I prefer to keep it (feel free
to drop the star if you want so long as you feel you maintain clarity). This replacement ‘strategy’, a2∗, is
called a reduced strategy.
Definition 8.71. In a game tree, a reduced strategy of a player specifies a move at each decision node
for that player, except at any decision nodes that become unreachable due to an earlier own move of that
player. We replace the move with a ∗.
In game trees it is usual practice to work with reduced strategies when these can be introduced and we
will do the same in this course.
119
8.4 Subgame-Perfect Equilibrium (SPE)
Let’s discuss the relationship between equilibria of the strategic form of a game tree and strategy profiles
obtained via backward induction.
When considering a sequential game in the form of a game tree, a solution to such a game should in some
way incorporate this sequential aspect of the game analysed by backward induction. That is, if we are to
prescribe some strategy profile of the players to be a solution (an equilibrium) to the game, then the moves
in this strategy profile should be optimal for any part of the game (any subtree of the game tree: a subtree
of a game tree is formed by taking a node of the original game tree as the ‘root’ node with all the descendant
nodes and moves included). This is because it would make little sense, for example, to specify a strategy for
a player as part of an equilibrium that selected a sub-optimal move at some decision node of that player.
Interestingly the usual convention here is to also include moves in subtrees that are no longer reachable due
to earlier moves of the players. This means that a reduced strategy should not be quoted as an SPE because
it does not specify a move for some subgames. As such, we have to take any reduced strategies that we have
identified as equilibria and then specify optimal moves at the unreached parts of the game tree to insist that
the equilibrium is subgame-perfect (there are examples on problem sheet 8 that will make this clear).
Definition 8.72. We call a subgame of a game tree any subtree of the game tree.
Remark: Note well that this definition for a subgame of a game tree holds only for game trees with perfect
information that we have been discussing so far. Shortly, when we introduce imperfect information to games,
we will adjust this definition.
Definition 8.73. A strategy profile that defines an equilibrium for every subgame of a game tree is called
a subgame-perfect equilibrium or SPE.
When analysing game trees we will insist that solutions to the game are SPEs. As alluded to earlier, there
is a very important result linking backward induction and SPEs.
Theorem 8.74. Backward induction leads to an SPE.
Proof. Not examinable so this has been omitted. If you are interested in how we may prove this then pages
91-92 of the text Game Theory Basics by Bernhard Von Stengel give an easy to digest proof.
Remarks: This result has important consequences:
• Since backward induction chooses moves deterministically, game trees with perfect information have
equilibria (SPE) in pure strategies. It is not necessary to consider mixed strategies.
• SPE exist in game trees with perfect information.
Remark: We have finished part I of the chapter on game trees of perfect information and are about to
enter part II of the chapter and begin our discussion on how to introduce and tackle imperfect information
in game trees. Now might be a good time to try problems 1 - 3 from problem set 8 which cover game trees
of perfect information. Solidifying your understanding here will help with part II.
120
Part II: Game Trees of Imperfect Information
8.5 Information Sets
We now turn to developing methodology for tackling game trees of imperfect information.
Consider now the same game as in figure 76 where firm A and firm B are competing over the market share.
However, suppose now that only firm A itself knows whether its product turns out to be strong or weak (i.e
this information is not released publicly and is kept internal to firm A), so this information is not known
by firm B.
Suppose as before that there is a 50% chance that firm A’s product will be strong or weak however and this
figure is still known to both firms. With all resulting payoffs and possible moves as before, the game tree
with imperfect information representing this game is drawn in figure 83.
Figure 83: The game tree of imperfect information for our example game between firms A and B where now firm
B does not know whether A is strong or weak.
An additional feature of this game tree with imperfect information is that some nodes of the players are
connected together by dashed lines (or sometimes enclosed within a blob/bubble if you prefer to use this
way of connecting them) that define information sets. Note also the moves from each connected node have
now been identically named (so for example firm B choosing to be bought out has been labelled as b1 at
both of player B’s connected decision nodes rather than b1 and b3 as it was previously).
121
The concept of an information set is that during a play of the game, given their current knowledge of the
game, a player only knows that they are at some node within the information set, but does not know at
precisely which one of the connected nodes they are at. In figure 83 above, firm B does not know whether
A has a strong/weak product. Hence if firm A decides to sell their product on the market (choice a1 or a3),
firm B does not know which of their two decision nodes they are at. The nodes are thus connected with a
dashed line to identify this as an information set of player B.
Remarks:
• In an information set, all nodes belong to the same player and all decision nodes in the set must have
the same possible set of moves available (otherwise it would be distinguishable which node a player
was at). We give these moves the same name to highlight this lack of knowledge of which precise node
the player is at (hence why b3 was relabelled as b1 and b4 as b2 in our example game).
• In a game tree of imperfect information all decision nodes in the tree should be partitioned into disjoint
information sets (in other words, each decision node should belong to exactly one information set).
However in many cases a player may actually know precisely which node they are at. In this case the
resulting information set consists of just this one node. No dashed line/bubble is used to connect this
node with itself as this node plays in essence just like a game tree of perfect information.
• A further consequence of the notion that a player does not know at which node they are at in an
information set means that no two nodes in an information set may share a path through the tree. This
is true, at least, assuming that the players recall all of their prior moves in a game and all information
they have learned during the game (any known opponents moves etc). We call this property of the
players perfect recall and will take a brief look at this in a little more detail in section 8.7. Throughout
our course we will always assume our players play games perfectly, and as such always have perfect
recall.
8.6 Strategies in Game Trees of Imperfect Information
Because a player does not know at which node they are at within an information set, they should make the
same choice of move at each node within that set. It would make no sense to try to recommend a player
do a specific move at a specific node in this set, rather, based on everything they know and have learned
about the game, they should make the move that they believe is best for them taking into account that they
are at some node in the set.
In our example game in figure 83, firm B does not know at which node they are at when the game arrives at
some node in their information set, they just know that firm A has chosen either a1 or a3: i.e firm A has put
their product on the market. As such it no longer makes sense to try to prescribe different moves at each
individual node. Instead, given firm B’s current knowledge of the game, and knowing that they are at some
node in the information set, we will try to determine an ‘optimal’ choice for the firm (which as mentioned is
then this same choice at every node in the set). As such, we specify slightly further our definition of a pure
strategy in a game tree from earlier for use in a game tree with imperfect information.
Definition 8.75. In a game tree with imperfect information a (pure) strategy for a player specifies a move
for every information set of that player.
122
As before, the strategic form of the game tree is then defined in an analogous way.
8.6.1 A note on Reduced Strategies
As before, when we were considering game trees of perfect information, there may be some decision nodes
for a player in the game tree that become unreachable due to an earlier choice of move by a player.
Figure 84: An example game tree of imperfect information to illustrate reduced strategies.
In the example above in figure 84, player A has 8 pure strategies; a choice of a1 or a2 at their first information
set (the set circled and labelled ○1 , the root of the tree), then a choice of a3 or a4 at their next information
set (the set labelled ○2 ) and finally a5 or a6 in their last information set (labelled ○3 ), giving 2 × 2 × 2 = 8
pure strategies.
However, the initial choice of move a1 or a2 will leave one of the remaining two information sets unreachable
for player A. As such we would typically consider A’s reduced strategies in such a game; there are four:
a1a3∗, a1a4∗, a2 ∗ a5, a2 ∗ a6,
where as usual, we don’t specify the move in the part of the game tree that is unreachable, but replace it
with a star. In a similar manner as before we can also produce the strategic form of the game tree and what
we may call the reduced strategic form of the game tree which considers the strategic form produced from
just the reduced strategies rather than all strategies.
8.7 Perfect Recall
Let’s talk about what the information sets ○1 , ○2 and ○3 describe in example 84. At set ○1 player A knows
that they are at the start of the game. At set ○2 player A does not know the move of player B but does
123
know that they are in set ○2 ; i.e that they played a1 at the start of the game. At set ○3 again the move of
player B is unknown but it is known that they played a2 earlier in the game.
Consider instead now the slight variation of this game, represented in figure 85.
Figure 85: An example game tree of imperfect information to illustrate the concept of imperfect recall.
Information sets ○2 and ○3 have now been merged to form one new set, we relabel moves a5 and a6 to a3
and a4 to highlight that A does not know which node in this set they are at. In this new game we say that
player A has imperfect recall. This is because they have ‘forgotten’ whether they played move a1 or a2 at
the start of the game.
Although imperfect recall is very common in many games between humans, throughout all of our analysis,
to ensure our players remain rational and play optimally, we will always insist they have perfect recall;
that is they remember all information throughout the game. Imperfect recall refers to a player that does not
have perfect recall.
8.8 Analysing our Example Game
Before we introduce the concept of a behaviour strategy and re-discuss SPEs, let’s go back to our example
game of imperfect information between firms A and B and discuss a solution scheme. The game in figure 83
is re-shown below in figure 86 for ease of reference.
124
Figure 86: Our example game of imperfect information between firms A and B.
When A has a strong product, it is clear firm A should play a1 (they will get at least a payoff of 3 regardless
of B’s move, which is more than A would get by playing a2). However, studying the game tree a little longer,
we see there is no deterministic (pure strategy) behaviour of the players that defines an equilibrium - if B
plays b1, A would always want to play a1 or a3, but then B would rather have played b2 in the left decision
node. A similar issue occurs if B plays b2. Let’s instead now consider the strategic form of the imperfect
information game tree, shown in figure 87.
Figure 87: The strategic form of the example game of imperfect information between firms A and B.
125
Recall that firm B will play b1 or b2 at both nodes now as they are in the same information set, hence they
only have two pure strategies. This game in figure 87 has two strictly dominated strategies for firm A; a2a3
and a2a4, so we delete these to arrive at the game in figure 88.
Figure 88: The strategic form of the example game of imperfect information between firms A and B with strictly
dominated pure strategies removed for firm A.
This game has no pure strategy equilibria, so a sensible next step is to seek any mixed strategy equilibria
of the game (Exercise: Do this). We find that randomising over playing a1a3 and a1a4 with probability
1/2 on each for firm A and over b1 and b2 with probabilities 1/4 and 3/4 respectively for firm B gives us a
mixed equilibrium of the game. This gives expected payoffs of 9/4 for firm A and 7/4 for firm B.
So we have found a mixed strategy equilibrium in the strategic form for our example game. We would like
to relate this in some way to the sequential game tree version of the game. To understand how we may do
this we briefly discuss the concept of behaviour strategies in the next section.
8.9 Behaviour Strategies
Game trees of perfect information always have an equilibrium in pure strategies that can be found by backward induction. This is not the case when we deal with game trees of imperfect information and we need to
re-introduce mixed strategies.
We have just found a mixed equilibrium in the strategic form of our example game. This was firm A mixing
(1/2, 1/2) over pure strategies a1a3 and a1a4 and firm B mixing (1/4, 3/4) over pure strategies b1 and b2.
Let’s discuss how to interpret these strategies in terms of the original game tree of imperfect information.
Typically, our interpretation of mixed strategies throughout the course has been that our players decide
these at the beginning of a play of the game and then, upon performing some realisation of this randomness,
stick to this plan of action throughout the game. When considering game trees of imperfect information we
can view a mixed strategy differently, as what we may term a behaviour strategy. A behaviour strategy
126
is a randomised choice of a move for each information set of the player, i.e rather than performing some
realisation of the randomness at the beginning of the game and then adhering to this plan throughout (which
is quite unnatural in reality), the player performs a realisation of this randomness whenever they reach a
new information set (a new decision that needs to be made).
In our example game between the two firms, the behaviour strategy viewpoint of the mixed strategy equilibrium turns out to be exactly the same thing since the game is small, but take, for example, the mixed
strategy (a1a3∗, a1a4∗, a2 ∗ a5, a2 ∗ a6) = (3/10, 4/10, 3/10, 0) for player A in the example game discussed
in figure 84. Treating this as a behaviour strategy it would be played as follows:
• At their first information set, ○1 , the root of the tree, a1 would be played with probability 3/10+4/10 =
7/10, where a2 played with probability 3/10 + 0 = 3/10.
• Then, if arriving at information set ○2 , a3 would be played with probability
3
10
3
10 +
4
10
=
3
7
,
where a4 with probability
4
10
3
10 +
4
10
=
4
7
.
• If arriving at information set ○3 , a5 would be played with certainty.
This way of performing the randomness from the mixed strategy is considered more natural when playing
the game.
Remark: There is much more than can be said about behaviour strategies - for instance it is not always
actually possible to enact all possible mixed strategies as a behaviour strategy. As far as we will be concerned
in this course however we will not discuss these deeper concepts and just want to understand how we may
interpret any mixed strategy equilibria we find in a more natural way, as behaviour strategies.
8.10 Subgames and Subgame-Perfect Equilibria in Game Trees of Imperfect
Information
Finally we come to a notion of what makes sense to deem a solution of our game trees of imperfect information. For game trees of perfect information, we argued that an SPE would suffice to be a solution of the
game. Now we have introduced imperfect information to the problem, we need to incorporate a few changes
to this.
When we looked at games of perfect information, we defined a subgame to be any subtree of the game, given
by some node of the tree as a root for the subgame with all of its descendants. This needs to be modified
for games of imperfect information so that every player has to know they are in this subtree.
Definition 8.76. In a game tree with imperfect information, a subgame is any subtree of the game such
that every information set is either a subset of or disjoint from the nodes of the subtree.
127
In other words, each information set lies fully in the subgame, or fully outside of the subgame. Based on
this updated definition we now slightly amend the definition of an SPE for a game of imperfect information.
Definition 8.77. In a game tree with imperfect information, with perfect recall of all players, a subgameperfect equilibrium (SPE) is a profile of behaviour strategies that defines an equilibrium in every subgame
of the game.
Typically, as before for games of perfect information, an equilibrium in a game tree of imperfect information
can only be termed subgame-perfect if each players behaviour strategy is not specified in terms of reduced
strategies and correctly defines a probability distribution for each information set of the player. It is still
good practice to use reduced strategies to first determine any equilibria in the game and then retrospectively
consider how to find any that are subgame-perfect (there will be examples on problem sheet 8 to help you
understand this).
Finally, perhaps slightly worried by the thought of whether an SPE can always exist in behaviour strategies
in a game tree of imperfect information, we state a very powerful theorem.
Theorem 8.78. Any game tree with imperfect information where the players have perfect recall has an SPE
in behaviour strategies.
Proof. Not examinable so this has been omitted. If you are interested in how we may prove this page 294 of
the text Game Theory Basics by Bernhard Von Stengel gives a proof but requires some deeper consideration
into behaviour strategies than what we have dipped into (all details are in this text if interested however).
So there is always at least one SPE in behaviour strategies in a game tree of imperfect information when we
assume perfect recall of our players. This is what we will take as a reasonable solution to our games!
128